[Music]
welcome to one of the biggest English
grammar videos on YouTube we're looking
at all of the grammar points here and
all of the grammar points here too
there's over 5 hours of English grammar
lessons and over 500 English grammar
points explained it's like a grammar
book but on video so if you like
learning grammar but don't like reading
books this is perfect for you and if you
want to get quickly between the sections
go to the timestamps that you can see on
the screen here now let's start our
Mammoth English grammar lesson with
articles articles belong to a group of
words known as determiners determiners
tell us which how many or whom to do
with a noun now articles have some of
the most complex rules for all of
determiners so let's look at them in
detail we'll start with the basic rules
and then go on to the advanced ones
let's first introduce what articles are
I bought a phone I bought an alarm clock
the phone is black phones are half price
on Black Friday the Articles here are a
an and the first of all let's look at a
and an or sometimes just pronounce uh
and
un we use uh or an before a noun when
it is one singular noun of
many here we're talking about a phone
but there are lots of phones in the
world here we just mean one phone out of
the many phones that exist the same with
the alarm clock there are lots of alarm
clocks in the world we're just talking
about one of them out of
many we're not focusing on a specific
example of the noun though when we talk
about the phone we mean this one but
we're not saying that it's different
from other
phones here's one example of a phone but
I could also have introduced another
example of a similar phone we're not
being specific by saying iPhone or
Samsung phone we're just talking about
phones in general
here it's also the first time that we've
mentioned it when you mention a noun for
the first time and it covers all of the
rules that are just listed above then
use uh or UN in most situations when
it's a singular noun and also it's
important that you can count it we can
count phones one phone two phones three
phones one alarm clock two alarm clocks
three alarm clocks but there are some
words we can't count like water here we
can count it so we use a or an so what's
the difference between a and an well uh
goes before words starting with a
consonant sound but an goes before words
starting with a vowel sound so a phone p
is a consonant and the F sound is a
consonant sound alarm clock starts with
the vowel sound uh and it's important to
note it's the sound that matters not the
actual vowel or consonant letter if it's
a vowel sound then we say um before it
if it's a consonant sound we say uh
before it because there are some
situations where a consonant or a vow
letter actually corresponds to the
opposite in terms of the sound now let's
move on to the the phone is black how is
this different to uh or
un first of all whenever we use the' we
are making the noun unique in some
way so here we're not just refer
refering to any phone we're referring to
a phone in particular which is black as
we can see on the screen it's black so
there's something that um describes it
in a unique way compared to other
phones the phone is black not another
color we're focusing on a specific
example of the noun here so here we
really do just mean one particular phone
when you use the' we're talking about
one phone and we know which phone it is
when we talk about a phone we are saying
it could be any phone we're not being
specific to just one individual item
that exists in the
world and also if you've mentioned it
before in the same context we usually
switch from uh to the let's put the two
sentences with phone together I bought a
phone the phone is black I bought a
phone that's the first mention of the
noun the phone is black is the second
mention so having introduced the phone
with uh I now become more specific by
adding the' in front of the
noun note that when we use the' the noun
could be countable or
uncountable so phone as we saw is
countable but water which is uncountable
could also have the in front of it if
the other rules are um applicable to
that particular noun that you can see on
the screen here finally the basic uses
for the last example where there is no
article at all phones are half price on
Black Friday this is sometimes called
the zero article because we don't use a
an or the here in front of the noun so
why did we not use uh an or the here
it's because of one of or more of these
features used no article before a noun
when it is one plural noun of
many so there are many phones in the
world and some of them are half price on
Black
Friday so we're not referring to just
one phone here it's not only one phone
that's half price on Black Friday there
will be many many phones that are half
price on Black Friday so here phones
means more than one it's a plural
noun just with it uh and un we're not
focusing on a specific example of the
noun this plural noun could represent
any number of phones out of all the
phones that exist in the
world and again with uh and N usually
this is the first time you you've
mentioned it phones are half price on
Black Friday if I then went on to talk
about the phone the same phones a bit
more I could then say the phones can be
bought on this particular store online
store perhaps now it's a little bit
different to uh because with phones with
when there is zero article if we have a
list of features to do with a phone or
phones in plural then we could
potentially keep using the plural noun
again and again and with no article
where we're simply introducing more
information about that noun each time so
phones are half price on Black Friday
phones are useful for uh keeping up with
news in the world phones are um owned by
the majority of adults in the world so
I'm listing different bits of
information to do with the phones if I
do that then I can keep saying phones
without the uh article because I'm
simply listing more general information
about them and when you use zero article
this can go with nouns that cannot be
counted so for example water would have
zero article we wouldn't use a or n in
front of water because it's an
uncountable n now let's go on to the
advanced uses of Articles then first of
all let's go back to the what we call
the indefinite article which is a or un
look through these sentences first I
bought a phone it was a black phone a
range of phones are on sale a phone is
useful for watching
videos these sentences reveal more about
why we use a or or an A or an first of
all can be used after copular verbs when
mentioned for a second time look at the
first two sentences I bought a phone it
was a black
phone I've used uh twice here with the
first mention and the second mention why
did I not then use the for the second
mention well it's because of the
structure that came before it
was it was introduces a um a compliment
to the subject so the black phone here
describes it the subject nothing happens
to the phone the phone simply describing
something was comes from the verb to be
which is a copular verb verbs that are
used to link descriptive information
afterwards to the subject before and in
this case we can still use a with the
second mention of the same
noun next before a group noun if all the
other rules for using a or are fulfilled
so a range of phones this is a group
noun here it's not just one phone it's
many phones but the word range turns
into a group it collects it together as
one a range how many ranges one range so
a range makes it singular but in reality
it's still many phones so in this
structure a or an can be
used and then finally a phone is useful
for watching videos well here we're
introducing an example to represent all
types of that noun what I really mean is
every single phone could do this uh but
a phone here is an example of all of
them
phone is useful for watching videos this
phone but then also another phone and
another phone they're all useful for
watching videos so if we mean an example
that represents all types of the noun we
can still use a or n now on to the let's
look at the sentences first and then
let's explore them the range of phones
in the shop was more expensive than the
range of phones online the latest phone
has has new
features why did we use the in these
sentences well first of all again we
have a group
noun the range of
phones so here we could have used a
range of phones but we have a slightly
different meaning if we say the range of
phones here we have to go back to the
rules for a n and the with A and N we're
being General it could be any group of
phones but with the remember we're being
specific to a particular group of phones
so when we say the range we mean only
this range not all of them so the can be
used before a group noun just as uh is
used but again if other rules for using
the are
fulfilled also when specifying a noun to
make it
unique the latest f
so here we're not just talking about any
phones we're focusing on something
unique about it the latest
one the always draws us to a sense of
one we're looking at one thing we're
looking at one group so the latest phone
now limits the phones we're only talking
about a specific phone we have specified
it to make it unique in some way and
then with superlatives so latest is an
example of a superlative superlatives
are adjectives that tell us the highest
or lowest most or least the number one
or the one in last place here the latest
comes from the word
late although latest is slightly
different because latest actually means
the last one to happen before now so in
other words the newest because the last
thing that happened before now is the
newest thing so the latest phone in
other words the newest phone it's a
superlative meaning the number one in
terms of which one came last before this
moment and now let's look at some
Advanced uses of the zero
conditional read these sentences with me
first connectivity is vital in the 21st
century phones enable people to connect
with each other across the
globe so here we have no article at all
no uh no n no the but why did we do this
well first of all no article can be used
with topic nouns in a general sense so
here con
connectivity is a topic noun it's the
subject of being connected
connectivity refers to a number of
issues to do with being able to get on
the Internet or being able to get a
connection that gives you uh data
through uh transmission from satellites
phones uh mobile signals anything to do
with connectivity anything that helps
you to be
connected so this is a topic noun and
even though we don't use it in the
plural it doesn't have an S afterwards
we still use zero article because it's a
topic
noun then next with abstract nouns that
are not usually counted so connectivity
would also count as an abstract noun
it's not something that we can sense we
can't see it we can't hear it we can't
touch it we can't feel it we can't taste
it or smell it it's not something that
we could sense it's an idea in our minds
so usually if an abstract noun cannot be
counted then use zero
article if we're saying what a plural
noun is usually like then we would also
use zero article so phones enable people
to connect with each other across the
globe here we're talking about phones in
general and what phones are usually like
what do they usually
do it's similar to using a or un
followed by a noun as an example of many
but here here we're doing something
slightly different and we're saying that
it's what the phone is usually like this
is what the phone usually
does there are a number of special
article rules and this is often where
most confusion comes up I'm going to go
through some of them
here first of all look at the maps at
the bottom you've got the United Kingdom
and you've got France but notice I say
the United Kingdom but but I don't say
the France I just say France why we use
the with countries which are real words
or plurals or Island groups so United
Kingdom is uh made up of two words which
you would find in the dictionary they're
real words United is a real word that
means together and Kingdom refers to an
area where one person is in control
perhaps a king or a queen
mean France however doesn't mean
anything at all it's just the country
name so we use no article here next look
at this River here with rivers we say
the before them the river Amazon the
river temps the River Mississippi or
just the
Mississippi however with lakes or
waterfalls we don't use an article so
it's Lake
Victoria or um Niagara Falls we don't
tend to use the in these
situations what about mountains well
mountains can be described as a range
such as the Himalayas or it could be
described as an individual Mountain such
as Mount Everest notice the difference
here the Himalayas we have article
followed by the mountain range but Mount
Everest has no article at all with
mountain ranges deserts and
forests we don't um we use the article
so the Himalayas the Sahara the Amazon
rainforest but with individual mountains
we don't use the
article what about words that describe
directions on a compass north south east
or west compare these two examples I
live in the
North I live in South London now you
could have said I live in the south of
London notice there's a difference here
we said the north but just south
London let's go through it so what about
the when we have north south east and
west on their
own in other words they are nouns
meaning that area
then we use the article the north the
South the East the west or the southeast
the Southwest the Northeast the
Northwest combinations will also have
the here the words go on their own and
they mean a specific Place uh that's
normally known to be U north of
somewhere else or south of somewhere
else but when describing another noun we
don't use the article so we don't say
the South London we say South
London here south is describing London
it's describing another noun now there's
two ways to do this you could say South
London I live in South London or you
could have said I live in the south of
London so here we have the and of as the
combination did you go to the shops did
you attend school
why did we say the shops and not the
school well here the rules are rather
complex most nouns for places take the
the shops the museum the palace the park
but some common places drop
the did you go to church did you go to
school did you go home these ones don't
have the unless you are
deliberately specifying one and not
another now it gets a bit complicated
here because you could when you say did
you attend school you could mean one
school in
particular but in general
conversation when we say did you attend
school we may be thinking of one in
particular but we also mean just the
concept of going to school in
general and if it's the concept of going
to school in general it doesn't matter
if we know that it's only one particular
school that you go to we still don't use
the
article however there are some reasons
why you would want to specify a place
and use
the if I said did you go to the church
when I say that you mean one church and
not another church
so when we try to distinguish between
different nouns of that type then we
would use the but if it's seen as being
a general practice uh which is routine
where maybe it only refers to one
particular place in general uh in
principle um it can still be without the
article because we're referring to the
concept of going to a particular place
even if it's the same place every time
and finally
transport I'm taking the train I'm
traveling by
train now why the train but by train
well this is an exception in English
with common transport types It's usually
the done thing to use the before the
transport type but when you use by don't
use the article I'm traveling by train
I'm traveling by bus so by makes the
difference here if we use by drop the
article and there are a range of
detailed lessons on articles on my
course Advanced English grammar for C1
or C2 students I've developed this
course specifically for advanced English
students who have a higher level perhaps
I out 7 I out 8 but you want to progress
even higher article use is one of the
ways to improve your level of English
once you are at the higher levels
because getting them right will make a
fantastic impression on the people who
are either reading your work or
listening to you so there's lots more on
that course on articles uh lessons
exercises and free PDFs covering some of
the things I've mentioned here and
more first of all the basic uses of
demonstratives have a look at these two
pictures what do they make you think of
they might make you think of this look
at the painting this is an example of
excellent
art here are some precious stones these
are highly
valuable and this introduces two of the
most common demonstratives this and
these and together with that and those
these words are the most common
demonstratives in English this that
these and those and this lesson is going
to focus on those words looking at the
basic uses and then going on to the more
advanced ones first of
all this that these and those point to
other things or other people look at the
first sentence look at the painting this
is an example of excellent art this is
pointing to the painting we've already
mentioned the painting and now saying
this what I mean is the same down that I
mentioned before the painting So this in
effect is replacing the painting it
avoids repetition and it helps join your
speaking or your writing together for
the listener or
reader here are some precious stones
these are highly valuable what do we
mean by these we mean precious stones
it's pointing back to the noun from
before what's the difference between
them well let's go on to
these pictures here to investigate first
of all look at this street in a
town and then on the right you've got a
winter scene of a
village on the left you're in the town
you're on the road on the right you're
looking at the Village from a long way
away so what we say changes like this
for the town where you're near where
you're in we say this is a lovely
town but the town which is far away that
you're looking at from the
outside that's a lovely town now why is
that it's because
this refers to things that are
near that refers to things that are
far and this and that both refer to
singular noun so in this example town
was a singular noun these and those do
the same thing but for plurals these is
plural and
near so I could have said uh these are
lovely houses because they're near me
I'm in front they're right in front of
me but if I'm on a mountain looking at a
range of villages in the distance I
could have said those are lovely
Villages so it's plural and
far now onto the advanced uses
though what do you think of the
house I like
this what did you think of the party
last week that was a great
evening what's the difference between
the
two this and these can refer to
situations and experiences that are near
in time so what do you think F of the
house I like
this I'm saying it about an experience
I'm having now I like this moment I like
the house and I'm in it now I like the
house and I'm standing in it I'm really
near to
it but that was a great evening well
notice was is a past tense verb we're
referring to something last week so
there's a distance there's a gap in time
between our situation now and when it
happened so to refer to that use that
because it's far away in time that and
those can refer to situations and
experiences that are far in
time have you ever been to this place or
has anyone ever asked you about it if
someone asked you would you like to go
on holiday to Antarctica would you reply
like this that would be rid
ridiculous that would be ridiculous but
why do we use that in this case it could
have been referring to a question that
was asked instantly so where's the
distance in time here well something
else is going on here here we're being
more
hypothetical and if we are referring to
a
situation using that then we're being
hypothetical and we're more likely to
use that or those to speak
hypothetically than when using this or
these it's that idea of distance when
you're hypothetical you're putting
distance between reality and
yourself reality and yourself are apart
here because you're speaking in an
unreal way that and those are more
natural to go with a response in such
situations
have you ever seen one of these this is
an eclipse when the Sun goes behind the
moon also in America every four years
they have an
election consider these two sentences
here an eclipse happened in England in
1999 that was the last time an eclipse
happened in
England in formal writing this and that
can refer to information from the
previous sentence uh but the difference
is in the sense of being near or
far with the first example an eclipse
happened in England in 1999 that was the
last time an eclipse happened in England
there's a sense of there being some
distance here in terms of time uh we
we're looking back from now to
1999 there's distance in time so use
that
but in the second example Donald Trump
won the US election well as I write this
video the election has just happened so
I feel that in time uh that's this is
fairly close it's only a few weeks ago
from the time of recording this video so
I've used this is the 47th time a
president has been elected in the US now
if you're watching this video in 5 years
from now uh you might need to change it
to that and that was because you want to
give that sense of being far how do you
choose then between a sense of being
near and a sense of being far well
there's no perfect way of deciding you
have to decide for
yourself basically if you're in
something or if you're close to it or if
you're within the time that something's
going on you're likely to use this if
you're further outside of the time
you're likely to use that but you have
to
choose some other uses of these words
that are worth mentioning before we
finish those who help poor people should
be given an
award and there's a picture of a medal
in uh yellow above but those who who
here means the people who the people who
help poor people should should be given
an award those is a general word
referring to everyone who is defined by
what comes after
who and have you ever been in a
situation where you couldn't decide
whether to go left or right maybe a
friend comes along and tells you I am
certain that we need to take the left
path and you respond if you feel that
sure let's go that way
now there's three uses of that here but
I'm only going to focus on the one in
bold
here if you feel that
sure here that means to a great extent
that here really means a lot you could
do it with this and you could do it with
that um if you feel sure to a great
extent let's go that way so that's
another way that we can use this and
that now there's other instances of that
that come up in these sentences there's
more to say about that when it's not
demonstrative and we'll particularly
look at that later in this video when we
describe um sentences Advanced English
sentences when we come to the section on
Advanced English sentences then we'll go
to other uses of that because it's a
very uh versatile word in
English now let's look at common
quantifiers there are lots of
quantifiers in English uh we're just
going to look at four of the most common
ones here some any much and many again
we'll start with the basic uses and then
look at some more advanced rules to do
with these words first of all the basic
uses for some and any
have you ever gone out at nighttime and
seen a sky like
this if you have you might say the
following I can see some
Stars you might turn to someone else and
say can you see any stars now perhaps
their eyesight is not as good as yours
so they say no I can't see any stars I'm
not wearing my
glasses here we've introduced Su and any
can you see the
difference sum and any both mean an
unspecified amount how many stars we're
not sure some definitely more than one
less than all of them somewhere in
between the same for any and notice that
some here is used with positive
sentences I can see some Stars sometimes
we'll call this affirmative sentences
and any is used with negatives no I
can't see any any stars or questions can
you see any
stars now the basic uses of much and
many did you get much food I didn't get
many
beans much and many mean a large amount
so when I say did you get much food I
mean a large amount of food when I say
many beans I mean a large amount of
beans but here I didn't get a large
amount of
beans the main difference between much
and many is much is used with
uncountable words so food we cannot
count food we don't say one food two
food three food we'd have to use meals
instead one meal two meals three meals
uh but beans is countable so beans here
means um more than one bean
but what about in these
situations have you bought any food with
you no I haven't got much have you
bought any coins with you no I haven't
got
many notice here that much and many
don't describe another noun they're used
on their own without the noun the full
form would have been no I haven't got
much food no I haven't got many coins
but we just say I haven't got much I
haven't got many much and many can be
used without the noun they describe if
it is clear from
Context now on to the advanced uses of
quantifiers some any much and many let's
go back to some and any first of all
look at the picture here you can see
some sources imagine you go to a
restaurant and someone says would you
like some sources with your
meal now you expected more choices than
this so you say quietly to the person
you're sitting next to there are hardly
any
choices now did you notice that some and
any here Break The Rules we mentioned
earlier on some we said go goes with
affirmative sentences any we said goes
with questions or negatives so why the
switch here it's for this reason
some first of all usually represents a
positive
meaning therefore if asked in a positive
way for example if you're expecting yes
as the answer some can be used in a
question so here Su Paints the um
options
positively now why that use Su instead
of any it's because any gives the
opposite impression any usually
represents a lack of
something so if i' said would you like
any sources with your
meal any points to a small amount a
limited amount any tends to limit some
tends to paint it more
positively but what it also means is
that any can be used in affirmative
Clauses when you're trying to get the
meaning across not
many so there are hardly any
choices there's a small amount of
choices we can only do this with
negative words though so we need words
such as hardly or rarely or never in
front of any in order to do
it now on to another Advanced use look
at all these cars on the
road lots of cars and busy cities
normally lead to the picture below which
shows
pollution perhaps someone would say this
there are too many cars on the road
there is so much pollution in this
city here we use many and much in
affirmative Clauses positive statements
not a question or a negative but we've
got two and such in front of
them in affirmative sentences much and
many often come after to so as and how
and in fact much is not used very often
in an affirmative sentence unless we do
this there are some exceptions I'll
cover one in a moment but in general we
would tend to use another word in front
of it before we did now many is much
more common in affirmative statements
than much we can use many uh more widely
in an affirmative sentence
so to let's look at this in a bit more
detail I could see many
cars this is quite normal to say but I
could see much
pollution doesn't sound natural we would
prefer to say something else so many is
much more common in affirmative
statements than much but a lot of is
preferred to much in such context so
instead of saying I could see much ution
we're more likely to say I can more
likely to say I can see a lot of
pollution let's look at another you
Advanced use of these words and let's
focus on the word much here now here we
have used much in an affirmative
sentence much has been written about the
research into various
viruses now this kind of writing is
slightly
different much can be a subject on its
own meaning a great
amount so much has been written about
the research into various
viruses this is the kind of writing
we're likely to see in formal writing so
reports business academic writing
professional writing not so common in
spoken English and notice there's a
passive Clause much has been written and
we have this Invisible by someone here
about the research into various viruses
much does this a lot
many doesn't do this in quite the same
way first adverb position there are
three main positions for adverbs there's
the front position before the subject
for example quickly they ran to get out
of the rain quickly is the adverb or
that is the mid position where it comes
between the subject and the verb they
quickly ran to get out of the rain or
the end position where it comes after
everything because it was raining they
ran quickly for the mid position
sometimes you have an auxiliary verb and
the adverb comes after that auxiliary
verb for example they have probably been
running to get out of the rain so it
comes after the auxiliary but before the
main verb however with the verb to be
the adverb has to come afterwards for
example they were completely wet by the
time they
arrived now informally it is possible
for an adverb to go before to be if you
are trying to emphasize the verb in
particular they really were trying to
avoid the rain so here really is the
adverb and it's intensifying were it's
making were more prominent so putting
the adverb in that position can make to
be more prominent but it's in an
informal use here are some things to be
careful about though adverbs usually
can't go between the verb and the object
in the sentence here they quick they
left quickly the house quickly cannot go
in that position because it's between
the verb left and the object which is
the house adverbs don't usually belong
here also they don't usually go between
two verbs that are next to each other so
they started quickly running from the
house well here we have two verbs
started and
running we can't put quickly in the
middle of those so although adverbs have
very flexible positions there are some
rules where you can't place them adverbs
of degree here are some basic adverbs of
degree um slightly mostly very
completely extremely enough or almost
they all tell us something about the
amount or the intensity of words coming
afterwards but we can have some Advan
Alternatives too so slightly could also
be marginally marginally means close to
something uh but not far away from
instead of mostly predominantly
predominantly means similar to mostly it
means a lot of what there is or it takes
the position which is most prominent uh
very could become truly it's not often
used but if you're looking for a formal
alternative to very it can be used in a
similar way uh completely can be
entirely extremely can be replaced
sometimes with immensely immensely
emphasizes the great amount of
something enough could be replaced with
sufficiently in some context
sufficiently means a certain amount has
been achieved and almost sometimes can
be replaced with virtually particularly
if you're talking about a number that's
nearly up to a certain amount but not
quite we're almost there we're virtually
there let's look at some of the rules
associated with adverbs of degree then
so as we mentioned they tell how much an
adjective adverb or verb is so these two
examples it was too hot to go outside we
almost ran out of gas so two and almost
are the adverbs and they go in the mid
position uh after the verb to be but
immediately before the verb
otherwise however with particular words
there are some rules to be aware of
firstly with just just comes either in
the mid position or it can come after
the subject here's a bus at a bus stop
picking up uh some people and if you're
looking at this scene you could say the
following I've just seen the people at
the bus stop just two people were left
at the bus stop in the first example we
have the mid position between the
auxiliary have and the main verb seen
and in the second example just comes
before the subject two people
let's go on to the word to which is
too this comes before a determiner or an
adjective so the lady here looks like
she's worried about something so a
friend maybe came to her and said Relax
you worry too
much the lady in response says I didn't
finish the book I heard that the ending
was too up setting so two would normally
go in that particular position not at
the end not at the
beginning with the word enough there are
some complications again enough can come
at the end of a sentence so if you're
asking someone do you like Instagram I
would reply this I don't know I don't
use it enough I hope I will one day I'd
love to put my videos on Instagram as
well but I don't know it well enough yet
maybe I will soon maybe you can help me
in the comments and tell me how I can
get set up on Instagram that would be
helpful however enough could also come
before the noun it describes so I
stopped posting on Instagram that's true
why because my posts didn't get enough
followers really has more than one
possible meaning and that affects the
position of this word you usually it
comes before the word it
modifies I really enjoy eating Chinese
food here it modifies the verb it was a
really impressive concert here it
modifies the
adjective really often means a lot and
when it means a lot it goes before the
adjective what do you think of this card
do you think it should be sold scrapped
or are you you one of those people who
love old cars well if you love old cars
you'll probably say it is a really
incredible car and here really means a
lot to do with incredible incredible to
a great
amount uh but really can also mean in
actual
fact when it means in actual fact it
goes at the
front so if you're one of those
enthusiasts about old cars but perhaps
you'll say I decided to keep my old car
really I should have bought a new one so
here really doesn't mean a lot it means
in actual fact in actual fact I should
have bought a new one I thought about it
and that was the correct thing to do
even though I didn't adverbs of
frequency again let's look at some basic
adverbs of frequency first rarely
sometimes often you usually always five
very common adverbs of frequency can we
make this more advanced well there are
some Alternatives you could use in some
circumstances barely means almost never
so that could be used in a frequency
sense as well uh sporadically is a
little bit like
sometimes sporadically means from time
to time but not very often
instead of often frequently is commonly
used when we get to often and frequently
we're becoming a little bit more
positive with the time we're suggesting
that uh something uh happens more
frequently rather than less and
frequently and often both have that
sense uh usually could be replaced with
routinely routinely doesn't mean all of
the time but it means at regular
intervals
so a routine can possibly be something
that doesn't happen that often but when
we use the word routinely we very
commonly do use it for something that
happens perhaps every day every week uh
something that happens in the same way
and then always well you could replace
that with invariably invariably means it
happens in a way that doesn't change
and that can have the same sense as
always I always go to the shops on
Saturdays uh I invariably go to the
shops on Saturdays it's got a similar
meaning to always here invariably means
every time the
same now for some of the rules with
placement of frequency adverbs frequency
adverbs tell how often a word happens
and they usually take the the mid
position as in the example we can see
here I always brush my teeth either
subject then adverb then
verb it in informal situations they can
come at the end too yes I brush my teeth
always it's not something you'll see in
formal situations but you can do that if
you are speaking in a casual manner
remember of course with the verb to be
that the adverb again needs to come
after the verb to be instead adverbs of
place some common adverbs of place could
include above below inside or near
sometimes adverbs of place can also be
prepositions of place but remember that
an adverb will describe a verb or an
adjective or a whole sentence whereas a
preposition wouldn't necessarily do some
of those things how can we replace these
more basic adverbs of place with more
advanced versions well above could be
replaced with over and aoft have to be
careful with above because above has
many possible meanings something could
be above something else simply if it's
sitting on top but it could also be
above if it's a long way above perhaps
you're looking up into the sky and the
alternative words have uh different
meanings that may con contain one of
those meanings but not the other over is
a general word to mean it's in a
position that's up to the thing describ
being described but over can also mean a
cover which is different to above a loft
is more to do with something that's very
high um below sometimes can be replaced
with beneath
again you have to be careful because
below has many meanings beneath covers
quite a few of them uh inside can be
replaced with within and within focuses
on something that is surrounded by sides
uh inside has a similar meaning and near
well you could replace that sometimes
with a
alongside um but again with near lots of
different meanings alongside won't work
for all of them uh alongside means in
close
proximity but uh near could also be in
terms of time and it may not work for
that so adverbs of place can come
directly after the word it is describing
here's a street with people uh so I
could use some adverbs in this way the
street in
front was full of people the fire alarm
sounded so I ran
outside so in front describes the
street so it comes afterwards and I ran
outside well outside describes ran so um
outside here describes the verb it comes
afterwards so here the rules between a
PR position and an adverb uh kind of
come together because they come after uh
words that they are describing uh they
could also come before as well for
example outside the street was full of
people so outside is the adverb and it
describes the whole situation here the
street was full of people where outside
adverbs of manner there are many adverbs
of manner and they have different types
as well here are a few basic adverbs of
manner you're probably familiar with
slowly quickly quietly loudly carefully
carelessly here are some Advanced
alternatives to those so slowly could be
sluggishly sluggishly has a kind of
emphasis on uh laziness someone dragging
themselves around they're not moving as
quickly as they should quickly
swiftly quietly
faintly this works for some meanings not
others they heard a sound
quietly they heard a sound faintly well
here the meanings could overlap because
it they refer to a sound which is not a
very high
volume but you probably wouldn't use
faintly if you're giving an instruction
please speak quietly you wouldn't
replace it with faintly you wouldn't say
please speak faintly so faintly works
with some meanings of quietly but not
others so be aware of that um loudly
vociferously vifer usly means with a
great amount of voice vifer usly goes
further than than loudly though
vociferously can also mean that you are
forcefully speaking not loudly speaking
but it can be related to loudly as
well uh carefully
attentively they usually can be synonyms
um but attentively has more of a focus
on listening carefully uh but it can
also be concentrating carefully too
uh carelessly sloppily sloppily is a
rather informal casual way of saying
carelessly let's go onto the position of
these adverbs of manner so adverbs of
manner tell how something happens and
they can go in many positions usually
you can be very flexible with adverbs of
manner front mid or end
positions so confidently she entered the
room here confidently is the adverb that
one goes at the
beginning she gladly told of all her
past achievements gladly is the adverb
here it's in the mid position and she uh
sorry her friends left the room quietly
quietly here now is in the end position
so all positions possible in general but
there are of course some exceptions to
that one thing to be aware thereof is
that to improve
Clarity adverbs should not be too far
from the word they
describe so look at the two alternative
sentences at the bottom here think for
yourself which one works better so the
first one confidently the people who had
been waiting outside in the rain for an
opportunity to speak entered the
room the second one is the same but with
a small difference the people who had
been waiting outside in the rain for an
opportunity to speak confidently entered
the
room the best one is certainly the
second one why because the adverb and
the word it describes are close together
the problem with the first one is that
confidently is so far from entered that
you may have
forgotten that entered is being Modified
by an adverb by the time you get there
because there have been so many words in
between and therefore the clarity the
coherence of the sentence doesn't work
as well so it's best to bear this in
mind if you are thinking about how to
position your adverbs of manner try to
make sure they don't come too far from
the word which is being described
adverbs of time basic adverbs of time
could include early
late eventually recently and previously
note carefully that late not lately here
lately has a different
meaning what are some Advanced
alternatives to these common time
adverbs early could be timely in some
situations if you say I arrived early
you could also say I arrived in a timely
manner
uh but here timely does something
slightly different to early timely means
at a good time now early is normally
also a good time but if you arrive 2
days early that might not be timely
because that might have been too much
time before you were supposed to arrive
so timely work sometimes not always
late um could be replaced with Bel latly
lately means um more time than expected
after the expected time which is a
similar meaning to late we often use
belatedly when you receive something or
do something quite some time after we
expect perhaps you receive a birthday
card 2 days late you received it
belatedly it was a long time after you
expected
eventually could be replaced with
ultimately ultimately means in the end
eventually can have a similar meaning
now recently can be replaced with lately
don't be confused with lately lately
actually
means the time just before now not after
not too much time after what was
expected lately similar to recently
lately is if you have like a whole year
then the last week might be
lately maybe in the last year you have
been uh trying um uh to read a book and
you found it really really hard but just
in the last few weeks it got easier so
you could say lately the book has been
much easier than it was earlier in the
year and previously you could replace
with
forly now let's look at the position of
time adverbs usually they go in the
front or the end positions last year
there was a fantastic celebration here
last
year it can possibly come after the noun
it
describes look at the no entry sign here
what was the problem well only 10 people
got into the event the people after had
to go home so here after comes after the
words literally the words that it
describes adverbs of duration are
slightly different ad adverbs of
duration uh Encompass a longer period of
time not a moment in time they normally
come at the end of a sentence or a
clause unless the adverb is the key
information in the clause or the
sentence in that case you can put it at
the front for example for a long time
people had not left their homes due to
covid
restrictions now what if you have
multiple adverbs all next to each
other how do you decide the position for
these when there are several adverbs
together we often follow this order for
these three types of adverbs we start
with the manner then we have place then
we have
time here's someone being encouraged
about a game they're going to play
tomorrow perhaps a competitive game and
the two people say good luck for the
game you need to play brilliantly out
there tomorrow so brilliantly is the
manner adverb out there is the place
adverb and tomorrow is the time adverb
adverbs with
modals with modals we normally put the
adverb afterwards so adverbs usually
follow modals look at the example here
you must always wash your hands before
eating and that's the common way to do
it but here's an exception
if you are intensifying the model then
put it before you really must wash your
hands before eating what's different
here really is emphasizing must it's
making must more important in the
sentence if you want to do that put it
immediately before the modal verb
adverbs of certainty completeness and
evaluation first let's look at certainty
words ending ly to do with certainty
commonly but not exclusively take the
mid position so words like possibly and
probably relate to certainty the level
of
certainty probably is higher certainty
possibly is lower certainty and here
they're both in the bid position this is
possibly the hottest day of the year so
possibly after the verb to be
I probably know all of the people in
this room so here is not the verb to be
so the mid position is between the
subject and the
verb other models of certainty that's
those without ly are more likely at the
front or the end
position maybe you should open the
window that's if it's too
hot could you introduce yourself
apps again the rules for adverbs are
flexible so these are not the only
positions that you will see these
adverbs in but these tend to be the
patterns that adverbs of certainty
follow next
completeness again these usually go in
the mid position the box is entirely
full we can't fit anything else in so
entirely is the adver
that describes a complete
situation uh if you want to
emphasize the whole situation then
completeness adverbs could be placed at
the end I finished eating the cake
completely there's nothing left so here
completely has greater emphasis because
it's outside of the
sentence and with valuative adverbs
there's no strong trend for
position so a word like surprisingly can
be an adverb for evaluation because it
tells us we were surprised about the
information we're talking about gives us
our response to the information and in
this sentence it could have been in any
of those positions either the end the
front or mid special word
rules and here we're going to look at
some individual R rules where there are
some changes that are important to know
about firstly
quiet uh when quite means somewhat or
fairly it usually goes before the whole
noun
phrase there was quite a loud noise
coming from the hall uh so here it means
a fairly loud noise not the highest
amount of noise not the loudest it could
be not the quietest but nearer loud than
quiet because it's somewhat
fairly however quiet can also mean
totally when you place it before the
adjective and after the article so if I
say it was a quite unnecessary noise I
no longer mean it's fairly unnecessary I
mean it's totally unnecessary so the uh
position of the word changes the meaning
here
now for the word
rather normally this comes before
adjectives it was a rather cold day but
in storytelling it is sometimes placed
before the article too it was rather a
cold winter in Canada in
1947 next already yet and
still with already we normally place it
in the mid or end position I'm already
doing it I'm doing it
already with yet we have a choice
because yet can be an adverb where it
usually goes in the end position I
haven't done it yet although on rare
occasions some people may place it in
the mid position uh but it could also be
a conjunction linking two Clauses
together he didn't have any tickets yet
they still let him in and here yet goes
at the front of the Clause it belongs to
with still uh it's usually um in the mid
position uh sometimes it could go the
end position but usually mid I have
still got the same car that I had 10
years ago but with negatives this can
change uh it would go before the verb
phrase if it was a negative except when
using to be I still haven't been to the
garage to fix the brakes
and still can also be used as a
conjunction uh and in that case it would
go at the front of the
claws what about even and only well they
can go together because they have
similar rules in how they're used they
usually go in the mid position the old
car is incredible it even has sat nav
talking about that old car again however
it only has a maximum speed of 30 km per
hour so here they're both in the mid
position but if they're referring to the
subject put them at the
front even my rich relatives want to buy
my car only my father doesn't want it so
even and only are the adverbs my rich
relatives and my father are the subjects
of their respective sentences multiple
meanings hard or hardly
well hardly means not many not much or
not long and that's true in both of
these examples here hardly any people
turned up the room was nearly
empty we had hardly started the class
when the fire alarm
sounded but hard is quite different hard
either means there's a high effort
required or it refers to something
that's become solid and strong the exam
was hard I didn't know many answers so
hard effort was a high amount of effort
was required for the exam they made the
road hard so that it wouldn't crack
under the weight of cars so the road was
made Solid and strong so don't confuse
hardly and hard they have completely
different meanings when they are
adverbs fine or finally can also be
confused fine is usually used as an
adjective as here meaning good it was a
fine City there were beautiful places
everywhere whereas finely is an adverb
that means closely or carefully they
study the results finally to identify
any
abnormalities late or lately they can
both be adverbs but they mean something
different as we mentioned earlier in the
video late means after the expected time
but lately means in recent time before
now most or mostly most means the top
one so in my opinion the most
interesting sport to watch is
basketball here most is describing the
adjective interesting and it tells us
that if you were to list all all of the
sports from the bottom to the top in
terms of being interesting basketball
would be at the top and therefore it's
the most interesting but
mostly means the majority and most when
it's an adjective can also mean this
basketball is mostly played by
children most children play basketball
so most changes to being
um the majority when it's an adjective
and
mostly has the same meaning as an
adverb wide or widely well wide means a
big space for example if you go to the
dentist the dentist might tell you open
your mouth wide
please but widely is across a large area
or number of people the dentist has been
widely praised for her excellent skills
so widely praised here means by many
people first of all adjectives with no
noun now that sounds strange because we
are used to adjectives describing nouns
such as here young people like to play
Young is the adjective that describes
the noun people but when you use the
something can
change sometimes the' followed by the
adjective means no noun is required for
example the young like to play the young
forms the subject and like is the verb
so the young becomes the noun but young
is the adjective so what's happening
here in this situation the' followed by
adjective means all of the adjective so
when we say the young we mean all of the
young there are also different rules
when it comes to countries with
adjectives now usually country
adjectives can often become nouns after
the by adding an S for instance Mexican
is an adjective describing the people of
Mexico this can become a noun by saying
the Mexicans that means all people in
Mexico or Indian can become the Indians
but with some countries it's different
countries ending with a sh CH or EAS do
not need this extra s for example the
British the French the Japanese and
there are other instances where we have
this pattern the' followed by the
adjective where there should have been a
noun but the noun can be omitted such as
in this case when it is obvious which
noun is being described by an adjective
we can leave the noun out
completely compare these two she's the
cleverest pupil in the class here we
have the followed by the adjective
cleverest and then the noun pupil but we
normally expect a class to be full of
pupils so if we take the word pupil out
it still makes sense she's the cleverest
in the class we still know exactly what
we mean here because the context of
pupils is obvious but make sure that
this context is obvious perhaps the noun
may have been in a question beforehand
or maybe you use the noun in what you
said just before make sure it's obvious
then you can follow this little trick
now we're going to look at instances
where the adjective can come before the
article let's use this example of a car
what do you think of this car does it
look fast to you if you do think so You'
probably describe it like this a fast
car and this is a typical pattern for a
noun phrase with an adjective we have
the article if we need one uh then the
adjective fast and then the noun car
that's normal but in certain situations
we can change this such as with the word
as
I don't have as fast a car as yours so
with as we can now turn around the order
and have the adjective fast before the
article uh and there's some other words
that work in the same way how I never
knew how fast a car she had or so it was
so fast a car now this one's a bit more
unusual we're more likely to say it was
such a fast car rather than used so but
it can be used and it is grammatically
correct similarly with two it was too
fast a car the speed was very very high
too fast too fast brings fast before the
article uh but would usually say the car
was too fast also we can use that it was
that fast a car you'd probably use it
after a sentence that works with this
perhaps the car was the fastest ever
made it was that fast a car and that
refers backwards to what we've already
said but it's another instance where the
adjective can come before the article
now when you use an adjective before a
noun you would think there's no
possibility that it get it could end a
sentence but there are many situations
where adjectives do end sentences first
of all have you ever noticed in English
poetry or English songs that adjectives
sometimes are placed at the end in order
to make the poems lines Rhyme or the
song lyrics rhyme that means the final
sound is the same in one line as one
before and people will use what's called
artistic impression or artistic license
to do this so instead of saying I saw
the Blue Sky if it's more con venient to
get the poem or the song to rhyme you
might say I saw the sky
blue we don't do this in normal writing
or speaking but when it comes to Poetic
English it's possible to do that another
example is when we have which followed
by to be then uh the adjective
afterwards in these cases sometimes we
can omit which and to be leaving the
adjective on its own
without anything else so instead of
saying it's the only answer which is
believable we can say it's the only
answer
believable now in both of these
situations the adjective comes at the
end of the sentence but in the second
one we have this interesting situation
where we have a noun that's immediately
followed by the adjective and what's
happened is we've left out which or that
and then the verb to
be this this is similar to who followed
by to be I saw some children who were
awake but we could leave out who were I
saw some children
awake it's not particularly common it's
something you're likely to say if you're
speaking in passing or quickly or
informally but it does happen and you
can use
it there are certain words where you can
place an adjective afterwards to finish
a sentence such as something your
friends have bought you something
special also everything don't worry I'm
going to make everything
better look at this lady painting a
beautiful
view and you might say this she has an
amazing talent she can make anything
beautiful after somebody or someone I'm
looking for someone t look at this tall
man the person is thinking about it and
describing to the other person I'm
looking for someone
tall and also with measurements we can
often put the adjective after the
quantity how tall are they oh I think
they are about 2 m tall 2 m is the
quantity and then the adjective that
refers to 2 m comes
afterwards here's an interesting use of
an an adjective at the end of the
sentence that you may not have come
across look at the example here's a lady
what's she doing to the floor you could
say or she could say I'm wiping the
floor clean now where's the adjective
the adjective is clean it comes after
the word flaw but why when we have verb
object and adjective and the object
becomes the adjective we can use this
pattern
I'm wiping the floor clean well
literally what happens to the floor it
becomes clean so because it becomes
clean we can put clean after the noun
floor because the floor becomes the
adjective and another interesting uh
peculiarity in English is that there are
many adjectives that start with a which
can come at the end of a sentence such
as look at the example here you got a
bear running after a Boy the boy says
I'm running away I'm really
afraid but the word afraid changes if
you want to put it at the start of the
sentence you wouldn't normally say the
afraid boy ran away afraid is normally
reserved for the the end position if you
want to use it at the beginning you need
to say frightened
instead and probably the most common
reason that you'll have an adjective
ending a sentence is when you have a
subject followed by a copular verb this
is where you have an adjective sometimes
called a subject complement the
adjective actually describes the subject
as you can see in the two pictures here
she is peaceful peaceful is the
adjective is is a copular verb and that
tells us that peaceful is describing she
she is not doing the activity activity
she is being described by P F or he
seems tired seems is a popular verb
tired describes the subject when
adjectives are intensifiers we have to
be careful about where we put
them look at the two examples it is an
absolute mess have you ever been
somewhere where you feel it's an
absolute mess you go into someone's
house and everything's in the wrong
place it is an absolute mess here
absolute is an intent ifying adjective
for mess it makes the mess seem greater
but when you try to switch the order
around and put absolute at the end of
the sentence it doesn't work you can't
do
it the intensifying adjectives need to
go before their noun but not after so
you'd say it is an absolute mess but not
the mess is
absolute one of the hardest things to
learn and remember about adjectives is
the order that you use if there are more
than if there is more than one
adjective when there are multiple
adjectives follow this order now it's
not a perfect order sometimes people
break the order but this is the general
order to use if you have more than one
adjective you have to consider what type
of adjective each one is to decide on
the order so starting with a noun such
as the word Rod a r is something to
catch fish
with the first adjective that you would
use nearest to the word Rod would be its
purpose so you could say a fishing rod
but if you want to add the material that
needs to come before fishing and Rod so
you would say a wooden fishing rod in
that
order and if you talk about the origin
let's say it's English that comes before
any of those
too what type of Rod is it it's an
English wooden fishing
rod then the color it's a red English
wooden fishing rod then shape well I've
said rectangular here I couldn't think
of a shape for the fishing rod but if
you did have a shape it would come here
so let's just imagine it's nice and
straight and long let's call it a
rectangular red English wooden fishing
rod obviously you wouldn't use all of
these adjectives at the same time
normally you might use two adjectives
maybe three I think if you're using five
adjectives that's probably too many but
if you want to use them they need to
come in this particular order here's the
next type age a new rectangular red
English wooden fishing
rod physical quality a thin new
rectangular red English wooden fishing
rod then size short for
example and then opinion the opinion
comes first what type of roded it is it
it's an amazing short thin new
rectangular red English wooden fishing
rod but of course we wouldn't usually
use all of them at the same
time we would probably pick two or three
so we might say it's an amazing new
fishing rod how do we choose the order
well we go through this list and we
start off with amazing then new then
fishing because it's opinion then age
then
purpose or a short wooden fishing rod
here we have the size first then the
material then the purpose a short wooden
fishing rod now some adjectives end with
Ed and some adjectives finish with ing
but the root is the same for instance
here what should this boy say what best
rep um represents the picture you can
see I am bored or I am
boring which one is it well if you say I
am bored it means something else makes
you feel bored but if you say I am
boring it means you cause someone else
to feel bored so you've got to be
careful which one you use whether you
use the Ed or the ing because if you use
the wrong one you may accuse the wrong
person of being that adjective if you
say I am boring you're basically
criticizing
yourself the correct answer here for the
picture is I am bored the boy looks
bored perhaps by the book He's reading
something else to be careful with with
Ed adjectives is their pronunciation now
usually adjectives ending Ed do not have
a vowel sound in the Ed so it's not a
Amed it's amused it's not cooked it's
cooked but when you have a t or a d
before the Ed then we do need that vow
sound otherwise we have a problem going
from the T to the D or the D to the D so
it's not it's not want it's wanted it's
not decided it's
decided and there are a number of other
exceptions too naked learned when it's
an adjective learned where we we don't
pronounce the E would be for the verb
form for the past of the verb but
learned is an adjective that means
someone who knows a lot we also have
ragged sacred crooked beloved Wicked and
there are a few others too so be careful
and make sure you know when to pronounce
the Ed in full or when to just pronounce
the d most rules for comparatives are
fairly basic but it does get a bit more
complicated as you go along so the most
basic rules are that if you have a on
syllable word adjective then to make it
a comparative add e ER so fair becomes
fairer green becomes Greener and dark
becomes darker for example make it
darker and that really means more than
now increase the level of dark make it
darker or if you comparing two things
you can use than nighttime is darker
than the daytime
so than enables us to say that one thing
has a greater quality of something than
another so nighttime has a greater
quality of dark than the
daytime if there's two or two syllables
or more then usually we use more
followed by the adjective and the
adjective doesn't change so more
beautiful more historical beautiful
three uh three syllables 1 2 3 beautiful
historical four syllables 1 2 3
4 if a word finishes with a Y that
becomes I eer such as happier and an e
simply becomes e r we don't add another
E on such as nicer but there are a few
irregular forms to learn little becomes
less good becomes better bad becomes
worse much becomes more and far becomes
further or possibly farther superlatives
follow a similar pattern with one
syllable add EST EST with two or more
syllables at most followed by the
adjective y becomes I EST e becomes e
EST and The Irregular forms little
becomes least good best bad becomes
worst much becomes most far becomes
furthest or
farthest but how about if you want to
say there is an equal comparison or even
a negative
comparative using as and as can help us
here if there's an equal amount of
something you can say as followed by
adjective followed by as look at these
two people juggling they look exactly
the same so to compare them you can say
I am as good as you at juggling as good
as you means we're equal in terms of
being good at
juggling this person has dropped the
ball though so they're not in the same
level so we can say I'm not as good as
you at juggling not as good as you makes
it a negative
comparative now there's one more way to
do it and that's using not followed by
the actual comparative
adjective when you do that though it
doesn't mean the negative comparative it
could be the same as as an as or not an
as it can be equal or negative it does
it simply means not more so if you say I
am not better than you at juggling it
means my ability is either equal to
yours or worse than yours it's just not
better that's all so the example you can
see here in yellow can reflect either
the equal or the negative status that
you can see in white on the left
sometimes there can be some confusion
between adverbs and adjectives now
adverbs often add ly to an adjective in
order to become an adverb so nice can
become nicely we take the adjective nice
and we turn it into an adverb by adding
ly nice becomes
nicely but the complication here is that
some adjectives end in ly anyway such as
friendly they are a friendly group group
of
students and when you have an adjective
ending ly this doesn't work don't add
another ly to make the adverb you can't
say he acted
friendly you have to use a different
option here instead instead of adding
ly and some adverbs and adjectives have
completely the same form here is a
limited list of them some of the most
common ones there are more than these
it was a fast race adjective noun they
finished fast adverb because it's
describing finished the verb it is a
slow animal they played slow now often
we'll say they played slowly but
sometimes we can just say slow as the
adverb
too I am an early riser I woke up early
early riser adjective noun woke up early
early is an adverb here because it
describes how I woke up which is the
verb they are late to the party they
arrived late I like exams of the low
pass Mark the pass Mark has been set low
there is a very high mountain in this
country the plane is flying high there's
a situation where we can use adjectives
after imperatives particularly if you're
using the verb to be look at the
following here's what a sentence might
normally look like I want you to be nice
to the others turn it into an imperative
and you can simply say be
nice here nice is the behavior that is
expected so if we're using an imperative
to describe expected Behavior we can use
the adjective after be or some other
verbs there are a few rules to be aware
of when using adjectives with copular
verbs the normal form of a sentence
looks like this the brown shed is in the
field here we have the adjective before
the noun Brown followed by
shed with copular verbs the adjective
can come after the shed is brown so here
Brown still describes the shed but
because it's a copular verb it's come
after the shed at the end of the
sentence but there are a few more things
we can do
still these adjectives can be followed
by a preposition phrase or sometimes
called a prepositional
phrase the shed is black at the
top so here we're adding extra
information about the shed but we need
to make it clear we don't mean the whole
shed the shed is black but where only at
the top so we use a preposition phrase
afterwards to make it clear what we mean
by the black it kind of describes the
adjective now if something needs
explaining we could use a two Clause
this information is important to
here so here we're explaining the
important word important is the
adjective why is it important or in
which way to here it's important through
this activity or you can use a that
Clause sometimes this information is
important that you know about so that
you know about
is describing important and perhaps one
of the most complicated things to learn
is when an adjective changes meaning
when it changes
position look at the two uses of certain
here a certain woman walked into the
room that means a specific
woman and the woman was certain that
means that the woman had no doubts now
why did the meaning change it's because
it changed from being an adjective
describing the noun straight away a
certain woman certain woman going
together and in the second one certain
goes at the end of the sentence certain
still describes the woman but now it's
after the copular verb it's a compliment
and the meaning has changed
here here are 35 rules for verbs that
will make your English take off this is
a really special video because it's
going to fill in so many gaps in your
knowledge of advanced English grammar
areas such as subjunctives tives
ditransitives
delexical compound verbs copular and
more so let's begin with
subjunctives with the subjunctive put
simply we use the verb infinitive in
instead of changing for tense in the
second clause and this usually happens
when showing importance or being
hypothetical here's an example I wonder
if this has ever happened to you it's
definitely happened to me my car made a
strange noise yesterday maybe there's a
problem with the gears maybe there's a
problem with the brakes what do you do
you probably speak to a mechanic and
this is the report you get the mechanic
in insisted that he take the car into
the garage and I want you to focus on
the word take here instead of saying he
takes we use he take here take is the
subjunctive it's an important situation
and we are reporting what the mechanic
said and in this situation we can use
the subjunctive form now note that the
subjunctive is fairly formal it's quite
oldfashioned
and therefore it's not particularly
common but you may come across it and
there may be times you want to use it
but there is a more advanced issue with
the subjunctive and that is when do we
use the past subjunctive and when do we
use the present subjunctive and in
general we follow this principle for
hypothetical situations use the past
subjunctive that's for wishes or things
that are imagined now the past
subjunctive is usually made by using the
past form of to be which becomes were if
my car were newer I wouldn't have so
many problems with it and what you'll
find in hypothetical situations such as
if Clauses or I wish the next verb if
it's to be always takes were it's
unusual to use was in any part of the
uses of the verb to be that's for the
past subjunctive being
hypothetical however if you're trying to
State importance use the present
subjunctive so that's for things where
there are proposals suggestions anything
where you're trying to put importance on
a matter and look what's happened to the
verb to be here we have this rather
unusual situation where we have be in
the bare infinitive it is necessary that
my car be fixed by a trained mechanic so
here B is the subjunctive form now as I
mentioned it is rather old-fashioned and
sometimes people do choose simply to use
normal tense but it is still used in
English so you do need to know about it
let's move on to tives tives come from
transitive and intransitive verbs let's
first of all revise what we mean by
transitive and intransitive some verbs
are transitive in other words they need
an object to come after them for example
she borrowed my pen you couldn't say she
borrowed because the sentence would not
be complete we need the object for the
sentence to be complete we need to know
what she borrowed and she borrowed my
pen I paid the bill it wouldn't be
complete to say I paid without saying
what you paid we discussed the plans
these verbs are usually transitive there
may be some OD occasions where you can
use them without an object but that
would be quite unusual however there are
many verbs which are intransitive these
verbs do not have an object coming after
them for example they laughed we
wouldn't say they laughed a book they
laughed a joke they laughed with an
object afterwards it's just they laugh
we only need the activity here similarly
the situation
deteriorated or as is happening in the
next few days after this video is
released the US citizens voted these are
intransitive verbs so where does the
ergative side come into this ergative
verbs do something unusual because they
are transitive when the subject does the
activity but they're intransitive when
the subject receives the AC ity consider
the examples here we finished the
performance here it's transitive the
performance is the object and we do the
activity who do the who did the
finishing it was we we actually did
something and finished describes the
activity that we did but the next
example is different the performance
finished now can a performance do an
activity no
it's not an object or subject that can
do an activity finished is actually
something that happened to the
performance here it's a bit like a
passive form and when we have verbs such
as these that change between transitive
and intransitive depending upon whether
they're doing the activity or receiving
the activity then these are called
ergative verbs common ergative verbs are
these change close dry and finish move
Open start
stop there are also other verbs that can
change from transitive to an
intransitive now some also call these
ergative verbs many grammar books will
not call these ergative verbs they'll
just call the previous type tives it
doesn't matter what's important is you
know how these verbs work um sometimes
verbs change from transitive to
intransitive with no meaning change at
all and it doesn't matter matter what
the subject or the object is for example
I am driving a car that's transitive
because I'm telling you what I drive
what do you drive a car but at the same
time I can use it in an intransitive way
I am driving here I'm just focusing on
the activity and I don't need to add the
object some verbs work like this other
verbs can change from transitive to
intransitive but they do have a meaning
change look at the word returned in the
examples at the bottom Victoria returned
the dress she didn't want Victoria went
out but she has just
returned here the verb returned has
different meanings in the first example
Victoria returned the dress which is
transitive because there is an object
this means she gives something back she
returned the dress she gave the dress
back to the shop as in the picture in
blue but Victoria went out but she has
just returned which is intransitive it
means come back she has just returned
means she has just come back so the verb
changes meaning when it changes from
transitive to intransitive and there are
many verbs that do this you do need to
learn them one by one but you must be
aware that this can happen
now if we're being more advanced still
we can look at what happens when
transitives or
intransitives uh are attempted to be to
put into the passive form now
transitives can take the passive form so
I am driving a car can become a car is
being driven by me so here there is an
activity there is an object therefore we
can use the passive but intransitives
cannnot I am
swimming we can't make this passive we
don't have an object to move into the
subject position let's go on to die
transitives now die transitives are
related to verbs that can take two
objects and there are a number of verbs
that work like this for instance he gave
a gift to his father here we have two
objects a gift and his father a gift is
called the direct object because that's
what is affected by the action he gave
what did he give a gift but his father
is affected by the action too he gave a
gift well who too his father so the
indirect object is his father affected
by the activity and a gift is directly
related to the activity so that's the
direct object similarly he sent her
friend a
card so here um the order is reversed
she sent what did she send she sent a
card so the direct object is at the end
of this sentence uh but who did she send
the card to well she sent it to her
friend and these types of verbs are
called die
transitive uh in general when the direct
object comes before the indirect object
we separate with a preposition so you
would have noticed he gave a gift to his
father so here direct object first
indirect object after a preposition in
between when we revers the order you
probably noticed that we didn't have a
preposition so when the indirect object
comes first don't use a
preposition let's become let's be a bit
more advanced now though when converting
to the passive form
uh you have two choices you can either
put the indirect object at the beginning
of the sentence or the direct object at
the beginning of the sentence uh but
there's a small difference in how you do
it first of all we're going to look at
putting the indirect object at the start
of the sentence so when converting to
the passive and the indirect object
moves to the start of the sentence the
direct object goes before the subject
which is now moved to the end of the
sentence so let's work that through as
an example I gave a gift to my father a
gift is the direct object my father is
the indirect object make it
passive my father the indirect object
goes to the front a gift the direct
object stays after the verb but before
by me which is the subject I has now
moved to the end of the sentence by
me but a small difference if we do it
the other way round
when the direct object moves to the
start of the sentence the indirect
object goes after to but still before
the subject so I gave a gift to my
father if instead we put a gift at the
start of the
sentence then we say a gift was given to
my father so we keep that word to there
but all of that goes before
me a few verbs cannot be followed by the
the pattern indirect object direct
object these verbs must take the direct
object first for instance I explained
our ideas to her not I explained her our
ideas so our ideas is what we explained
it's the direct object her is the person
affected by the explanation and with
this verb we must put our ideas first
and her afterwards verbs such as
describe explain outline and Share work
in this way so it's really important to
be aware of this because it looks
completely wrong to a native speaker if
you switch the direct object and
indirect object in the wrong way with
these verbs so make sure you learn them
make sure you use them in the
appropriate
way now on to D lexicals
usually verbs describe the activity in a
clause I composed an email so the
activity here is composed that's what
happened uh you won a prize the activity
here is one that's what happened but
there are some verbs where this does not
always
apply delexical verbs can shift the
activity onto the object consider these
two examples in blue at the bottom of
the screen I gave it a try what's the
activity here well the activity is
actually try I gave it a try means I
tried also I had a shower what's the
activity you had is normally to do with
possession I didn't pick up a shower and
walk around the town with a shower did I
no shower is the activity here and give
a and have are two verbs that can be
delexical sometimes they carry the
activity sometimes they point to a word
afterwards which has the activity and
verbs that do this include do give go
make have and
take compound
verbs refer to English verbs which are a
combination of two words work through
the example here we have a picture of a
brain and a picture of a
storm what are the different topics
let's imagine we're having a discussion
we're preparing perhaps an essay
together as a group of people we're
trying to come up with ideas and we say
what are the different topics and
someone in the group says let's
brainstorm them so brainstorm is
actually a verb here I brainstorm you
brainstorm we brainstorm it's a verb but
but what's it made up of it's made up of
two words brain means thinking storm
means intense activity put them together
and you get the verb brainstorm which
literally means intense thinking and
there are a number of English verbs
which do this now by far the most common
way to make a compound verb is where you
use a prefix followed by the ordinary
verb so let's think about perhaps the
verb estimated which is at the bottom of
the screen I estimated the answer well
we can make this compound by adding
overestimated which means estimated too
high or underestimated which means
estimate too low so various ways to make
compound verbs in English sometimes we
simply take two words and put them
together very often we'll use a prefix
with a verb to make a compound
verb what are copular verbs copular
verbs link the subject to an activity or
noun that comes after the verb for
example the food tastes
nice so here nice is not affected by
someone tasting something nice actually
describes the
food so there's a difference to how
verbs normally work in this case taste
simply links nice to the
food so it's different to most other
verbs because usually the verb carries
the activity or the purpose of the
sentence for example the child went to
school and here clearly went describes
the activity that the child did go back
to the previous example at the top of
the page the food clearly does not do
the activity of the verb The food
doesn't do any tasting here the vood
tastes nice it simply links a
description to the word
food now typical popular verbs there are
more than this but some of the most
common ones are appear feel look seam
and sound it gets a little bit more
complex though um first of all comp
verbs are followed by nouns and
adjectives but not adverbs uh and just
let me check before we go to the next um
uh the next part of this video because
I'm going to go through situations where
you have a choice uh but when verbs are
being used in a copular way then you
need to follow them with a noun or an
adjective not an adverb so the food
tastes nice uh but not the food tasted
nicely it doesn't work here I'm going to
come to a situation where it does work
but not at the
moment as I said some verbs can be
copular or non-popular and this depends
upon both the type of verb and the
subject and here we're going to get to a
situation where we can use the adverb
eventually I'll get there in a moment
compare these two examples the food
tasted nice the boy tasted the
food can you see the difference here the
food tasted nice the food cannot do the
activity so nice describes the food
but the boy tasted the food well the boy
can do the activity here so here it's
non-popular and that means the boy does
the activity the boy does the tasting so
food is not describing the boy anymore
food is what is affected by the boy
tasting it's what he tastes and now we
can use the adverb the boy tasted the
food
nicely in this particular sentence
nicely can described everything that
happened
before what about the
causative the causative is used when
something happens because the subject of
the sentence arranged it in other words
the subject doesn't actually do it
there's a few verbs where we could use
the
causative made is one of them the
manager made me work overtime
so did the manager do the work no the
manager made me do the work so there's
two activities going on here I do work
but someone forced me to do
it notice the uh pattern here made me
work made then the object me and then
work in the bare infinitive not made me
to work but made me work let is another
form of causative here instead of being
forced to do something I'm allowed to do
something the manager let me finish
early so the
manager forced something onto me in this
case it's not forcing it's actually
allowing so they the manager allowed me
and then the activity finish is actually
something that the manager caused me to
be able to do the manager let me finish
early a common causative verb is with
get now here the subject
arranges for someone to do
something my manager got me to train new
workers so here got really means
arranged my manager arranged for me to
train new workers the activity is
train um but I didn't do it of my own
choice I was AR it was arranged by the
manager
similarly have H my manager had me
working at
weekends and this also means something
was done for the subject so my manager
had me made an
arrangement for this activity to happen
had me working at
weekends so those are some typical
causative forms but we have an issue
when when choosing between get or have
are they exactly the same or are there
any differences between them well there
are some small differences in emphasis
get emphasizes the forcefulness of the
arrangement if you say my manager got me
to make him a cup of tea we get this
impression of a manager being quite
forceful there almost like there was no
choice they did something that meant it
was necessary for me to do it here
notice the pattern got object two then
infinitive compare that with have though
which emphasizes the
activity look at the following the
manager had me make him a cup of
tea here hard feels softer it doesn't
have that same emphasis of pressure on
it it simply reporting that there was an
arrangement here now the focus falls on
the activity more
make so in one sense they're
interchangeable got and had both mean
there's an arrangement for someone else
to do an activity but the emphasis can
fall slightly more one way with got or
get slightly more one way with have or
had when we use the auxiliary and the
negative form usually it's fairly
straightforward it's fairly basic most
negatives require an auxiliary I own a
cat I don't own a dog so the negative is
made up of do as an auxiliary and not
abbreviated to n apostrophe T if you're
writing um to make the negative form or
I went to University I didn't start work
until I was 21 but there is a case where
this is
different with feelings and mental
processes you can use verb followed by
not when answering questions for
instance do you think people should go
to university if you think no you don't
have to say I don't think people should
go to university you could say I think
not it's rather formal but it is
something that people use it's kind of
the opposite of I think so I think so
means yes I think not means no and this
not form is still used quite a lot by
native English speakers particularly
after certain verbs such as I hope not
are they going to arrive late I hope not
that's a kind of structure that is used
quite a lot so it's worth knowing worth
listening out for and sometimes worth
using verbs and prepositions have
certain rules that are worth knowing
many verbs require a preposition to go
before the object verbs such as listen
or looking or look you should listen to
that not you should listen that or you
should listen the music you should
listen to that you should listen to the
music or he is looking at the stage not
he is looking the stage or he looks the
stage he looks at the stage or he is
looking at the stage now you may have
been aware of that but it's also
important to be aware of this if the
object is dropped the preposition is
also
dropped so instead of saying you should
listen to we don't do that we say you
should just listen you should listen or
instead of saying he is looking at we
simply say he is looking the preposition
is
dropped State and active verbs at one
level is quite simple but there are some
complications to be aware of let's start
by looking at the simple rules State
verb take the simple form whilst active
verbs can take the continuous form but
of course only in a suitable context if
you're trying to describe an activity
active verbs can also be in the simple
form too uh let's compare two of these
verbs one is State one is active and
it's worth saying that most verbs are
either state or active not both so the
first example I believe that the US
election result is fair well
I've produced this video a week before
the US election result in 2024 and we're
all hoping that people are going to say
it's fair uh here believe is a state
verb we wouldn't say I am
believing it may be possible in a very
informal scenario but in general people
will say I believe not I am
believing I am voting in the US election
though vote is an active verb so vote
reflects the activity here I am voting I
use the continuous form to reflect the
fact it's an activity that I'm
doing but some verbs to do with sense
can be both state and active consider
the verb smell dinner smells lovely here
it's a state
verb the dinner is not actually smelling
anything so there's no activity it to do
so smells stays simple but what about if
it's the dog not the dinner the dog is
smelling the dinner I hope that's not
happening to you if you're watching this
video and you have the dinner on the
table make sure your dog or cat is not
smelling your dinner before you carry on
maybe this is a reminder for you but
here the dog is doing an activity with
smelling so smell can be a state and
smell can be an
activity furthermore mental process
verbs can sometimes be state or active
as well for example I consider the vote
to be fair so here it's a state
form or I am considering whether to vote
or not here it's an active form and
there is a small meaning change here in
the state form I consider means you've
reached a decision but in the act form I
am in the process of reaching a
decision and we can use this pattern
with many mental process verbs like
consider if you are stating what is the
truth or a result you've come to then
you use the state simple form but if
you're focusing on the process then you
may use the active
form some verbs change between state or
active depending upon whether you are
discovering the quantity of something or
reporting the quantity of
something if you're discovering the
quantity of something it becomes active
for example she is weighing the
ingredients for the cake weighing here
is an activity but it changes when we
are reporting the quantity the cake
weighs 10 kg we would not say the cake
is weighing 10 K GRS and we would not
say she weighs the ingredients for the
cake if we're actually reporting an
activity so the verb weigh and some
other verbs where you're talking about
the quantity of something in a verb can
change in this way to be is commonly
known to be a state verb and it
generally shows permanence of something
or completeness or truths or facts but
it can be an active verb too in order to
show temporary
Behavior she is normally a quiet child
well this is stating her the permanent
side of this child that uh that is the
normal expectation this is what she is
like all the time or virtually all the
time however just for today she is being
really noisy today and here we use the
active sense is being to show that this
is a temporary Behavior State for the
child
and to see is usually a state verb for
information received through the eyes
but there is this completely different
meaning of c which is when it is an
active verb for relationships and
meetings so compare these I see a
mountain in the distance this is
information received through the eyes
but I am seeing an old friend in a cafe
by the mountain here it's an activity
describing a meeting that you're having
with
someone let's start with the present
simple and the basic uses we can use the
present simple for facts pandas live in
China also for truths it is good to be
kind and for descriptions that are true
now I have gray hair the man in this
picture might say also for present
habits are there things which you just
find yourself doing again and again for
example I always check my phone when I
wake up for present routines use the
present simple that's something that
happens at the same time over and over
again for example I brush my teeth every
morning and for Tim taes use the present
simple if you're looking at this
timetable and you want to describe it
you could say a bus departs every 8
minutes on Saturdays but now let's look
at the advanced uses of the present
simple you can use the present simple to
describe future time in subordinate
clauses look at the example give me a
call when you leave this is what the man
in the picture is probably saying to The
woman there are two Clauses here give me
a call is the first clause and when you
leave is the second Clause when you
leave is describing a situation in the
future now we don't use other words to
indicate the future here such as will or
going to it's just a subordinate clause
where we have the subordinator when
followed by you leave present simple so
this can be used to indicate future
time also instructions without an
imperative for example here you're
telling someone how to perhaps make some
bread or a cake you could say this first
you add milk then you mix in some flow
you're making it slightly less direct
the imperative is more of a command
rather than simply sharing with someone
so you could prefer to use the present
simple here you could also use the
present simple to make correspondence
more formal instead of saying I am
writing to you make it even more formal
by by using the simple form we write to
advise you of our new range of cars the
present simple is also used in permanent
situations the River Nile flows into the
Mediterranean Sea it's always happened
it's always going to happen it's
permanent use the present
simple and with State verbs we use the
present simple for instance in this
video here you you can see uh castle if
someone is looking from the position
where the video is taken they might say
I see a castle in the
distance now let's move on to the
present
continuous starting again with the basic
uses a basic use of the present
continuous is to indicate present
activities look at this baby what is
this baby doing right now the baby is
sleeping this is not something that just
happens in a moment this has probably
happened for many hours before and will
continue afterwards it's an activity in
progress the baby is
sleeping for activities close to the
present time we will use the present
continuous as well people are getting
excited about the band's
reunion now that might not mean right
now it could be around now before and
after but the general situation is
around now so use the present
continuous the present continuous is
used for repeated
actions this girl plays the piano over
and over and over again so use the
present continuous to emphasize that
it's a repeated action she is practicing
the tune until she gets it right one
activity then then the same activity
then the same activity over and over
again for future Arrangements we might
use the present continuous they are
meeting outside the cafe at 7 p.m. it
was planned before and now we're
describing this Arrangement by using the
present continuous but there are
Advanced uses of the present continuous
too temporary
situations can use the present
continuous I am staying at a hotel at
the moment but next week I'll move into
an apartment so to emphasize the fact
that staying at a hotel is temporary use
the present
continuous also for changes in general
the amount of traffic on the roads is
constantly increasing so to indicate A
change is happening in something
particularly with words such as increase
or decrease use the present
continuous the present continuous can be
used for an activity that is usually in
progress at a particular
time this lady is walking her
dog and she says this I'm usually
walking the dog when the rest of my
family wake up let's unpick this her
family wakes up at a particular time
every day and she is doing the same
activity
every day at exactly the same time that
her family wake up so it's kind of like
a routine but the routine is for an
activity to be in
progress at a particular
time if we are talking about behavior
that people have in the present we will
often use the continuous form with the
verb to be I am being you are being
you're being you're being too loud
keep
quiet means the present behavior is too
loud so use the present continuous to
describe it in that
way now let's look at differences
between the present simple and the
present continuous and when you would
choose between the
two firstly physical
feelings either can be used in most
situations I feel unwell I'm feeling
unwell well are both possible in this
situation the historical present is when
we describe a story that happened in the
past but use present tenses to make the
listener or reader feel closer to it but
which tenses would we use well if we're
giving background information we're
likely to use the present continuous
here's what happened it's riging hard
people are running to get
undercover so this is not the actual
story this is just what's happening in
the background around it and the present
continuous can be used if we using the
historical present but if we're using uh
simple forms we're trying to make
progress in the story so I run into a
shop the shopkeeper asks me why I'm here
I tell him one after the other after the
other so if we're trying to make
progress in time in the story the
present simp Le would be preferred if
we're using the historical
present what about using here or there
with present
situations usually we'd use the simple
tense here here is the key to the house
there comes the bus not there is coming
the bus but just there comes the
bus and if you're showing annoyance of
bad habits you could use is either form
she's always leaving the lights on
present continuous he constantly snores
in bed present
simple have you received an invitation
to an event such as a wedding often
we'll use this form are to or is to the
verb to be in the simple form followed
by two and this is useful for official
announcements we are to get married next
year the R2 Form B followed by two makes
it more
official if you want to show emphasis on
something then you can use the simple
tenses with do I do enjoy watching TV
here you need to stress the word do or
in the continuous form stress am I am
trying my best however you can stress
any word you want in a sentence to draw
attention to it let's move on to the
Past simple and the past continuous then
first of all the past simple and looking
at the basic
uses the past simple is predominantly
used for finished actions I applied for
the vacancy or for finished States I was
nervous while I waited for the response
it's a state it's how the person felt at
that time and for past facts the company
I wanted to work for for was the best in
the world it was true in the past we
don't know if it's true now but because
it was a fact in the past we use the
past simple also past descriptions look
at this well-dressed man he might say
this I was well-dressed on the day of
the interview the past simple describes
how he looked at that time and if with
past
habits use the past simple again when I
didn't have a job I always applied for
new vacancies on Mondays it was the same
every Monday we can use the past simple
we may also be able to use used to or
would for some situations when we
describe past habits but the past simple
is also commonly
used let's look at the past continuous
basic uses before we go on to Advanced
uses the past continuous is used for
finished activities in this pict
I was driving to the interview verb to
be then the ing form of the main verb if
you have the longer of two past actions
or if you're interrupting a long action
use the past continuous I was waiting
for the interview to begin when the door
opened or if you're giving background to
a story use the past continuous people
were talking in the room while I was
waiting for the interview to begin it
wasn't the main part of the story people
talking in the room was just something
happening around the story so use the
past continuous to show that it's
background
information what about the differences
between the past simple or continuous
let's move on to the advanced uses where
we choose between them if you're talking
about a past idea that is no longer true
you will you normally use the simp form
for example in the past some scientists
believe that the world was flat but most
scientists now believe it is round so
usually the past simple is used here if
you are trying to get the sense across
that it was a a temporary or an activity
for a particular reason you might choose
the past continuous but the past simple
is far more common here if you're trying
to link past events together in the
sequence the past simple is what you
need
in the experiment you can see below they
added water then they mixed it with salt
and finally they boiled the solution
past simple in a
sequence if you're describing events
happening at the same time in the past
you could use the continuous form 500
years ago men were trading in
marketplaces while women were bringing
up children these things were happening
at the same time men were trading in
Marketplace places women were bringing
up children not one followed by the
other but two events side by side
happening together at the same
time for situations that feel more
permanent about the past use the simple
form I lived in Mumbai for the whole of
my childhood it felt permanent to this
person because it was the whole of their
childood so they use the past simple but
if it's a temporary situation in the
past it's common to use the continuous
form I was staying in a hotel while I
was looking for a permanent place to
live this is similar to what happens in
all tenses permanent goes with simple
temporary goes with continuous if you
have a past activity that was often
repeated The Continuous form would be
pref preferred here and we particularly
use this with high frequency adverbs
such as always I was always playing in
the park in the evenings when I was
younger if you're being
hypothetical even if you're talking
about now or the future you can use past
tenses to show you're being hypothetical
that you're not being real you're just
imagining things and for this we can use
either the past simple or the past
continuous depending on the sentence
look at the picture do you think this
could happen to you could you travel in
this rocket it's very unlikely so we
would be hypothetical and use past
tenses suppose you were traveling in a
rocket to the moon how would you feel
here past continuous because it's an
activity we're imagining or if only I
knew the answer to this difficult
problem we're imagining it but we use
the past
simple distancing is a Technique we use
to be more polite we create distance in
time between uh us and the person
listening to create more space in other
words to make them feel they have more
space to respond and they're not
pressured by us distance in time can be
created by using past tenses instead of
present
tenses we can use either the simple or
the continuous but the continuous tends
to be more common when we're using verbs
for mental activities I was wondering if
you could pass me your map but simple
form is also possible I thought I might
ask you is that
okay and if we use that as the subject
of a sentence in the past it normally
goes with the simple form I passed my
PhD that seemed impossible a few years
ago now let's look at the rules for the
present perfect the basic uses of the
present perfect perfect include this
recently completed activities for
example I have just finished a lesson on
past tenses it was completed
recently also for recently completed
States I have seen the information I
need to complete the next task so scen
here is a state verb from to C often
used as a state verb uh but perhaps the
most important reason why we use the
present perfect is this one speaking
about the past from the context of the
present people often get confused with
the present perfect they think it's a
past tense but a clue is in the word
present we stay in the present moment
when we use the present perfect and we
talk about past
situations but from the Viewpoint of now
we're looking back to them from now
keeping in present time so when I say I
have watched hundreds of videos on
YouTube when did I watch them in the
past but what's the time period well
it's up to now and including now it's
the situation I am in
now this is all of my experience of
watching YouTube videos that I've
collected and I possess now in my memory
every everything from the past up to the
present and that captures the essence of
what the present perfect is now let's
look at whether you use the simple form
or the continuous form and this is where
it gets more advanced firstly when we
focus on an activity we usually use the
continuous form I have been writing an
email let's look at the next one before
we compare them together if we focus on
completion of an event we use the simple
form
I have written an email and now I am
going to send it we're talking about the
same activity but we're focusing on
different things if I say I have been
writing I'm interested in the process of
writing if I say I have written an email
I'm interested in in the fact that an
activity took place and the activity is
complete in
itself if we focus on something being
permanent
we normally use the simple form for
example I have owned this toy since I
was a child but if we focus on something
being temporary we use the continuous
form I have been wearing this hat
because the sun is too hot but I will
take it off this evening once again we
see how the simple goes with the
permanent the temporary goes with the
continuous
forms sometimes we have special phrases
that have particular tenses that go with
them this is the with an ordinal is one
of them this is the first time I have
tried chocolate ice cream if we have
this is the followed by a number and
then a word like time or instance then
follow it with the simple form I have
tried if we're maintaining present time
whilst introducing past events either
could be used have a look at the example
here here's someone helping an injured
woman now perhaps the ambulance has
arrived and what does he tell the people
in the ambulance what have I done so far
I've helped the injured woman simple and
I've been doing my best to help the
injured woman continuous now the
ambulance is here see the present
context how long an activity has taken
until now is commonly with the
continuous form I've been trying to get
your attention for ages for ages means
from a time in the past until
now another area where confusion happens
is when you're choosing between the past
simple and the present perfect let's
look at that now the present perfect is
common with already just or yet look at
the example sentences here I have
already been told about the meeting I
I've just been to the meeting I haven't
tried the suggestions
yet so is that the rule or not well
there's more to the story here and if
you've learned American versions of
English you may be familiar with what
comes next because in some varieties of
English the past simple is common with
these words I already knew about it I
just went there I didn't try that yet so
sometimes the use of the present perfect
or the simple depends upon where in the
world you are my version of English is
British English and that's like the top
half of this page but American English
sometimes is like the bottom
half commonly news reports start with
the present perfect to give general
information but switch to the Past
simple for more specific information
look at this a criminal has been
arrested in the Town Center he stole
several bags of sausages from a shop so
to start general the present perfect
fits because we're talking very
generally about an event and we're not
being specific about the time an event
happened in the past at any time in the
past having introduced the information
to the reader or listener we then go in
for the specific details and because
when we're being more specific we're
focusing on particular activities that
happen at a particular time time then
moving into the past simple is quite
common okay now on to the Past Perfect
the past perfect tends to be more
advanced it's harder for people to learn
let's look at some of the ways we use it
and then compare it to uh simple and
continuous
forms um the general use of the past
perfect is to make it clear which event
happened first and what events are not
in order for instance I was wearing a
plaster because I had fallen over and
cut myself earlier in the
day if you're repeating events before a
point in the past you'll also use the
past perfect he got top marks in the
exam what happened before he had been
studying every day for the previous
month so let's think about this a bit
more
first of all the time of the story is he
got top marks in the
exam why because of something that
happened before he had been
studying but the frequency was every day
it was a repeated activity that happened
over and over again before this point in
the past let's go back to the first
example
again why did we use I had fallen over
well because I fell over before I wore
the plaster the time of the story is
wearing the plaster but then we go
backwards in time and to show we've gone
backwards in time use the past perfect
if I said because I fell over it sounds
as if it happens afterwards which isn't
correct because the past simple takes
events forward but the past perfect
takes events
back if you're being hypothetical about
the past you can also use the past
perfect if I had run faster I would have
arrived on time so by saying if I had
run I'm thinking about a past event but
I'm imagining what a situation could
have been like if it things had been
different events immediately before
another in the past would also typically
use the past perfect they had just
finished preparing for the party when
the first guest arrived so what's
special about this it's something that
happened immediately before another
notice the events are in the correct
order here but by using the past perfect
we emphasize the fact that it came
before another and just before is
something that we often do even with
events in the right
order reporting speech in the past will
take the past perfect in many situations
what do we mean by reporting speech well
we tell we hear something and then we
tell some someone else and if it was
something in the past then we'll use the
past perfect when we report it when they
asked me about the preparations I told
them I had been preparing all day not I
prepared all
day sometimes we can use the past simple
when we report but commonly we'll use
the past perfect when we report
something that's already in the
past if there are intentions or wishes
that did not happen the past perfect is
often used to show this it's kind of
another hypothetical situation I had
planned to make a cake but I run out of
time did it happen no so it's
hypothetical now when would we use the
simple form or the continuous form there
are many reasons why but here's a
summary of the key one
activities up to a point in the past
could go with either depending on the
situation or which verb you're using is
it a state or active
verb look at the workers here perhaps
their Factory has closed down you could
say this the last workers left the
factory last year they had been working
there for the previous 20 years but you
could equally have said they had worked
there for 20 years
let's go back to a theme we've looked at
before in this video temporary
situations and we can use the past
perfect continuous for temporary
situations up to a point in the past the
crowd had been waiting to see the king
then he
arrived with States up to a point in the
past usually simple as we mentioned a
few moments ago the surprise party
happened yesterday most of the guests
had known about it for a number of
months so no is a state verb so use the
simple but sometimes we have to decide
whether we're using the past perfect or
the past
simple here's a way to decide if the
events are in time order we'll usually
use the past simple look at the lady
here we opened the door got out of the
car and walked into the mall that's what
she's about to
do so that's the normal way that we use
the past simple when events are in time
order I've shown you some exceptions to
that in the uh previous points where you
can use the past perfect and events are
still in order but generally when events
are in time order we use the past
simple but when events are not in time
order we use the past perfect we walk to
into the ball we had already got out of
the car so the second event happened
before the first so we Ed the past
perfect to show that the second event
came first and we're not using the
normal sequence of events that we would
with the past
simple if you're using the past perfect
followed by a clause with a
subordinator then you normally don't
need to use the past perfect again
particularly with reason clauses I had
left my phone at home because my mother
needed it not because my mother had
needed it if we say because my mother
had needed it we we're suggesting that
she needed it before I'd left my phone
at home which isn't the case the two
things happened at the same time so we
don't use the past perfect twice here
but if it's followed by a coordinator
the Clause then we will I had left my
phone at home but I had brought my
laptop so here and or but or or we can
use the past perfect again in the second
Clause now this does not mean that we
ignore rules to do with omissions we to
do with lists sometimes when we have a
list we can cut out the grammar if the
grammar is repeated in a sequence look
at the example below I had cooked and
cleaned all morning so here the use of
and takes cleaned and applies had to the
cleaned as well as had to the cooked
it's what we can do in lists if there
symmetry in the list we can cut out
extra grammatical words in the second or
third part of the
list let's move on to looking at future
time first of all with Will there are
many basic uses of
will when you have expectations for the
future you can use will they will be
here at 6:00 p.m. they always arrive
then with certainty about the future we
often use will nothing will stop the
rain from falling there's a certainty in
your voice also for promises and offers
I will buy you an ice cream if you do
your homework it's a promise
when you give consent to people then we
can use will it's saying you're allowed
to do something after this point they
will let you into the country with a
passport is a very common way of giving
consent and using will for the future
plans made in the moment we often use
will or the short form which is
apostrophe L to describe this look at
the man here he's on the phone why
because someone has asked him what's the
solution and he replies I'll call my
friend she'll know so when we say I'll
call my friend he's deciding what to do
in the moment I'll is short for I
will so when we make plans in that
moment and we describe plans as we're
going through the thought process use
will if you make a prediction but you
don't have the physical evidence Ence
you're much more likely to use
will here someone's thinking about rain
but they don't have evidence they just
say this I think it will rain later it
can't stay sunny forever they're
predicting it but they don't really have
evidence so will makes more sense
here let's look at the advanced uses of
will now orders use will if it's an
order for the present or the future you
will obey me this man is thinking it's
an order and will emphasizes the order
threats also go with Will let's expand
this sentence you will obey me or there
will be consequences so will suggests
the threat coming afterwards but will is
also used to refuse these orders and
threats they will not or they won't obey
you unless you offer them something in
return
the future is also made with going to
here are some basic uses of going to
when plans are already made and you're
simply restating a plan you've already
made now use going to why are you
picking up the phone this time I'm going
to call my friend but in this case the
person didn't decide on the spot they
decided before
and if you do have physical evidence for
a future prediction use going to instead
of will it's going to rain dark clouds
are coming towards us I have evidence I
have more certainty so going to shows
that extra certainty going to usually
makes the future more concrete more set
in stone and
fixed future Arrangements also can use
going to we're going to Dallas at the
weekend the trip has been planned for
weeks now sometimes you have to choose
between going to or the present
continuous can we use both for future
Arrangements without a change in meaning
well often yes but here are some things
to be aware
of firstly let's go back to restating
previous decisions we'd usually use
going to here here and not the present
continuous what are your plans for the
future I've already thought about what
to do I'm going to start a new course so
here we're restating a previous
decision with fixed Arrangements we
usually use the present continuous what
are your plans for next week I'm
starting a new course on Monday do you
see the difference between the two
with a fixed Arrangement I'm starting a
new course on
Monday I am stating my
plans but with the one before restating
previous
decisions I'm restating something that I
thought
about and that's led to particular
action it's not so much an arrangement
it's a statement of a decision so that
often how you distinguish between the
two decisions go with the uh going to
and arrangements with the present
continuous now there can be some overlap
going to can also be used for fixed
Arrangements because they are fixed
decisions as
well when we go to state verbs use going
to as well don't use the present
continuous what are you doing later
we're going to hear a speech not we're
hearing a speech that wouldn't fit
because the present continuous doesn't
normally go with State verbs unless
there are other special
rules there are other ways of expressing
the future too such as the future
perfect and these would all be
considered Advanced uses first of all
completion of something by a known
future time normally we'd use the simple
form here and we would say this by the
end of the year I'll have taken my I
outs examination so here we're
anticipating taking the IE outs
exam and it's in a time period between
now and another stated time period in
this case by the end of the year it
could happen at any time between those
points in time now and the end of the
year I'll have
taken if you're referring to an activity
that's ongoing up to a point in the
future particularly when you use for or
since or words like that that Express a
duration of time it's common to use the
future perfect continuous for example by
the end of the year I'll have been
studying English for 10 years I wonder
what you would say in if you put your
own experience in that
place anticipating what is true without
physical evidence
will have finished I want to return to
Dubai they will have finished Building
the tallest skyscraper in the world by
now so here this is one way in which we
can use the future perfect it could
potentially be simple or continuous here
depending on the context but that's one
reason why we use it anticipating what
is true without physical evidence
here you're just imagining it you've not
seen it for yourself you're just
imagining that this will be
true if you're anticipating what someone
knows you can also use the future
perfect and in both of these cases the
example about Dubai and the next example
we're actually talking about present
time not future time at all here we're
using the future perfect for present
time let's look at the example to do
with the picture below you could see two
cars crashing together I'm sure you will
have seen the news about the crash on
the motorway it was reported on every
channel
yesterday so here we're referring to
knowledge that someone has in the
present and more than that knowledge
about something in the present that's
based on something that happened in the
past a little bit like the present
perfect but we use will will have seen
to anticipate what we think someone
knows we'll have to is a similar
structure but works slightly differently
we'll have to refers to something
necessary after the present time look at
the example the museum is closed today
we will have to come again
tomorrow so it is necessary for us to
come again tomorrow something necessary
after the present
time let's move on to the Future
continuous now the future continuous is
made up of will the verb to be then the
main verb with Ing and we use this for
predicting future activities perhaps you
know that you're going to be like this
person in the picture tomorrow so you
need to tell other people I can't see
you tomorrow I will be working all day
I'm predicting a future activity and so
I use the future future continuous form
will be working also for predicting
future
responses he'll be complaining about
that I'm sure so here I'm
anticipating what the person thinks
about working all day tomorrow and I
think he will be complaining about that
not just once but on and on and on and
on an activity that's ongoing but it's a
response also guessing activities
happening now why are they working late
they'll be making plans for tomorrow I
imagine I don't know it's happening but
I'm guessing that this is what is
happening now somewhere else where I'm
not and the future continuous will be
helpful for that in this case again it's
to do with present
usage okay we're nearly at the end but
we have a little bit left to do yet next
it's future in the
past first of all we can use wood
followed by infinitive for an event
happening after the time in a
story here's a man who's got a clock in
his bed why is that well let's look at
the story and then let's think about
what it means people were celebrating
that
night but they would stay in bed for a
long time the next
morning so the time of the story is the
first part people were celebrating that
night when we use wood here we're taking
the position of time in that story and
Imagining the future after the point in
time of that story predicting the future
from a point in time in the past in
storytelling it's kind of like giving a
preview to someone when you're telling a
story your you're previewing the next
part so people were celebrating that
night but they would stay in bed that is
what is coming next in the
story we can also use was going to for
plans after the time in the story for
instance we ironed our suits because we
were going to visit a special event
later that day it was a plan that was in
the future at that particular point at
the moment when we ironed ourselves
suits but what's going to is often used
in another way as well and this is for
past plans that did not actually happen
look at this poor lady she has a problem
what is it we were going to drive to the
sea but our car broke
down we can also use the past continuous
for future arrange for future in the
past this is when we have
Arrangements after a time in the story
similar to how use the present
continuous for Arrangements after now
the past continuous is for Arrangements
after a past
point for instance they couldn't get to
sleep that night because they were
meeting the king the following morning
and they were nervous so the arrangement
is meeting and it was going to happen
after the point of the story basically
when they were go trying to get to
sleep and finally conditionals condition
use tenses in different ways for
different purposes here are the basic
uses which generally include the first
conditional the main reason for using
the first conditional is to uh say a
condition if a condition is met there
will be a present or future consequence
for instance if I earn enough money I'll
buy a new car so the present simple is
in the first
part the condition if I
earn and will is in the second part the
present or future consequence I'll buy a
new car but we can sometimes use will in
both Clauses where one condition
requires another condition if you will
work for me I'll help you get a new
car basically you do this I'll do that
two conditions at the same time where
one condition depends upon another
condition
moving on to more advanced uses the
second conditional is for unreal
situations with an imagined outcome it's
using the past simple but it's actually
to do with now or perhaps in the future
if I owned a car I would drive wherever
I wanted do I own a car no it's
unreal what would be the imagined
outcome I would drive wherever I wanted
the par simple for an unreal situation
to do with the present we as we've
mentioned before we turn the present
into the past to make things
unreal about the present the third
conditional uses the past perfect again
this is for an unreal situation but this
time not an unreal present situation but
an unreal past
situation if I had warned the driver
that another car was in the middle of
the road there wouldn't have been an
accident and lastly the zero conditional
here we use the present tense in both
Clauses where we're simply presenting a
general cause and effect rule when you
heat water to 100 Centigrade it boils
it's a general rule do this and that
will always
happen after you watch this you'll never
need to watch another video on the
passive voice again it's got everything
from the basics to the harder rules to
the really really hard C2 English rules
there are 25 rules in total in this
video we'll start with the simplest and
we'll move through to the advanced
English grammar rules for the passive
number one the basics in normal English
sentences we start with the the subject
then you have the verb and then some
words afterward such as the object in
this example the sun heats the Earth
which means the sun makes the Earth
hotter but we can also change this word
order and make a sentence which is
called the passive here the object goes
at the beginning then the verb then the
subject in this example the Earth is
heated by the sun we add the verb to be
and we add by we can change the active
voice into the passive voice by
following these steps first of all move
the object to the front of the sentence
then move the subject to the back then
add by before the
subject change the verb to the past
participle and include the verb to be as
an auxiliary verb and the verb to be is
the verb that now takes the tense so
here the verb to be is in the present
simple an extra note is that you can
actually remove the subject with by
completely and just have the object
followed by the verb you can convert the
passive back to the active by following
these steps in Reverse simply move the
subject back to the beginning move the
object to the end take away to be and by
and turn the verb to its original tense
form the passive can be used in any
tense here's how you do it for some of
the tenses is the present simple present
continuous past
simple present perfect future with Will
and with modal verbs notice with Will
and would which are modal verbs to be
stays in the infinitive form afterwards
for the other tenses the verb to be
changes according to the normal rules
for that
tense however some sentences cannot be
changed into the passive or if they can
there are certain rules to follow and
the rest of this video is going to look
at when you can make that change from
active voice to passive voice and how
you do it first of all sentences with
two objects the girl sent me a letter
this has two objects me and the
letter when there are two objects as
long as an activity is involved you can
usually start a passive sentence with
either object you could say this I was
sent a letter by the girl here me the
object becomes I the subject or the
letter can take the place of of the
subject a letter was sent me by the girl
or sent to me by the girl six is B plus
Ed D not B+
iing have a look at this woman she looks
surprised we could say this sentence the
results of the game were surprising
perhaps surprising to this woman now is
this the passive form we have the verb
to be before the verb here
no be careful to be followed by the verb
and ing is not the passive form the
passive form is where you use verb plus
Ed I was surprised by the results of the
game seven is transitive and
intransitive compare these two short
sentences I walk I baked a cake what's
the difference between these sentences
grammatically well you'll notice that I
walk does not have anything afterwards
it's
transitive we cannot add an object here
we can't say I walked a race I walked a
road it just stopped as I walk you could
perhaps add some information about the
time or where you're walking but that's
not the object that's adverbial
information the second sentence though
is what we call transitive because it
does have an object I baked a cake what
did you bake a cake so I baked a cake is
transitive because it takes an object
but I walk as intransitive because it
doesn't how does this affect the passive
form well I walk cannot be passive
intransitive verbs cannot be converted
into the passive form they have to stay
active however I baked a cake can be
passive a cake was baked by
me however some verbs are not obviously
transitive or intransitive for example
the verb to run in one of these
sentences the verb to run has no object
I run every day everyday is not an
object that simply tells us the
frequency but the second example I run a
shop means I'm the owner of a shop and
the shop is the object what do we do
here well we follow a similar principle
where there is no object we cannot use
the passive but where there is an object
we can so I run a shop can be changed
into the passive form a shop is run by
me there are also different rules for
the passive depending upon whether
you're talking about an activity or a
state let's compare two examples here
first of all let's look at this book
this book tells a
story because there is an activity here
the verb tell involves communicating
information from one place to
another you can make this sentence
passive a story is told by this
book however look at this example here
the book seems a guaranteed winner now
the verb seem is not an activity it's
what we call a state verb is to do with
describing in this case we cannot make
seam passive seam is not an activity
it's a state verb therefore it must
always stay in the active voice and not
be changed into the passive voice 10 is
dummy subjects what do I mean by this
well look at the picture here what can
you see this is the planet Mars and it
is known that people do not live on
Mars look at the structure at the
beginning of the sentence it is known
that what does it mean here we've got
the passive form we have to be is and
known which is the past participle of
known so it's a passive form with it at
the beginning what's happening well
what's happening here is that it points
to the information that's underlined
people do not live on Mars so it is
known that well it the subject really
means the information after is known
that it means people do not live on
Mars it is known that people do not live
on Mars people do not live on Mars
doesn't make a very good subject so we
place it replace it with it at the
beginning of the sentence and that
introduces the fact that something is
known what is that something people do
not live on Mars however there are some
possible problems look at these
sentences here both John and Jane
competed for the trophy it was one in
the final
match but who won it's not clear the
problem with using it sometimes is you
need to make sure there are nouns that
it can refer to clearly here we have
both John and Jane two subjects in the
previous sentence we also have a trophy
so we have three nouns in the previous
sentence it refers to the trophy but
it's not clear who won the match there's
not enough information here so be
careful when using it sometimes using it
means the reader has a problem finding
the right information to know the final
situation that you are describing what
about when we're using the word being
the present participle of to be with the
passive well there are some
considerations to make now usually you
can just follow normal rules so for
example if you say is being being to
mean the present continuous this is okay
so do you know someone who has a large
YouTube following the YouTuber is being
followed by millions of viewers so this
is a present situation it's happening
now we need to use the present
continuous so we use is as our tense
marker and then we want the present
continuous of the verb to be is being
that's okay
hey is there a problem with this
sentence though they had been being
followed by millions of viewers now
grammatically this looks okay it's the
present perfect and in the continuous
form so it's grammatically correct but
it is usually avoided it's too confusing
to have the past participle being next
to the present participle being people
don't tend to use this in everyday
English now we're going to look at
Omission this is when you leave words
out of a sentence which are normally
there have a look at this sentence here
salmon which are found in the Atlantic
Ocean tend to be of very high quality so
salmon is a fish it lives in the
Atlantic Ocean and in other places too
and when you find it in the Atlantic
tion there's really good salmon there
notice we're using the passive form
which are found now what does witch
refer to well which which refers back to
the salmon and here we can do something
special with Omission we can actually
leave witch are out when the subject is
the same in both Clauses the passive can
be shortened salmon not wit are found
but salmon found in the Atlantic Ocean
tend to be of very high quality so there
are two Clauses here found in the
Atlantic Ocean tend to be of very high
quality the subject for both Clauses is
salmon and when that's the case we can
leave these words out the relative
pronoun and the verb to be and just go
straight from salmon to the past
participle and this works in defining
relative clauses that means that the
Clause after the noun defines the noun
so we're not talking about all salmon
we're just talking about the salmon
found in the Atlantic Ocean but there
are also things you can do to create
Omission in non-defining relative
clauses where the information is just
extra it doesn't limit the noun let me
explain look at this sentence here
penguins
which are found in the southern
hemisphere always stay in the same pairs
for life so here we are talking about
all penguins we don't mean just the
Penguins in the southern hemisphere we
mean that all penguins are in the
southern hemisphere we're describing all
penguins not just some penguins this is
called a non-defining relative Clause
because the relative Clause gives us
information that is about everything to
do with the noun not just some of the
noun what can we do here well again we
can omit the uh relative pronoun and the
verb to be but with the non-defining
relative clauses we could do something
else as well and that's this found in
the southern hemisphere Penguins always
stay in the same pairs for life what's
happened here well in non-defining
passive Clauses these can be shortened
and also moved to the front of the
sentence and here we have what's called
a participle Clause it starts the uh
sentence and then it's followed by a
comma and then you have the rest of the
sentence afterwards grammar books might
call this a participle clause or a
participle phrase but the key thing here
is we have the past participle starting
a clause or some information that then
is ended with a comma and then you have
the rest of the sentence it's another
way of organizing the sentence using the
passive form but it has to have this
Omission when you do it 15 is passives
with object infinitives what does this
mean look at these two sentences I
wanted to see her I wished that he would
come the object infinitive here is I
wanted to see her now normally with an
object infinitive we don't usually use
the passive we can't change I wanted to
see her into the passive
form it's also true with that Clauses as
well I wish that he would come we cannot
change this into the passive except that
is in certain conditions here is a way
in which we can make the object
infinitive into a passive
form one way is when there is an
activity and there is an object before
the infinitive look again at the
sentence not he told to see her but he
told me to see her we have the object me
before for the infinitive before to see
and in this case we can use the passive
I was told by him to see her 17 is
moving object noun
phrases look at these two sentences here
my uncle cooked a meal that contained
fish my uncle cooked a meal on Sunday
now in both sentences the object is meal
but we have different information coming
after the meal
which phrase describes the object here
is it that contained the fish or on
Sunday well the phrase that describes
this the object is that contain the fish
a
meal what do we know about the meal oh
it contained fish so contained fish
describes the meal on Sunday doesn't
describe the meal on Sunday describes
the whole sentence when everything
happened now why is this important
well it's because of this if a phrase
describes the object then it must stay
next to the object when it moves in the
passive form look at the passive form
below a meal that contained fish was
cooked by my uncle here that contained
fish moves to the front of the sentence
with a meal it doesn't stay at the end
the second sentence was an example of an
adverbial at the end it gives
information about the whole sentence my
uncle cooked a meal on Sunday now what
happens to the position of on Sunday
when this becomes the passive in this
case it's completely different if a
phrase describes the sentence it does
not move with the object in the passive
form it stays where it was so when we
make the this second sentence passive we
do the following a meal was cooked by my
uncle on Sunday not a meal on Sunday was
cooked by my
uncle but we also need to look more
deeply at what happens when you have
multiple verbs in a phrase because we
can't always change them into the
passive here are two examples to help
you first of all look at the following I
needed to leave the event can I change
it into the passive and say the event
needed to be left by me well we wouldn't
normally do this although grammatically
it seems right we don't do this in
practice we often avoid making passive
sentences with two verbs next to each
other except that is when there is
active
participation upon the subject by that
second verb here the passive is more
natural and more likely to be used look
at the example at the bottom I needed to
make the dinner the dinner needed to be
made by me let's consider the difference
between to leave and to
make so leave the event means go out of
somewhere make the dinner involves you
doing something to the dinner when you
leave the event you don't do something
to the event but when you make the
dinner you do something to the dinner in
this case the passive is much more
naturally going to be used by native
speakers passive and
with use with to introduce anything used
by the agent for example I was surprised
by my husband with a bunch of flowers
with introduces what my husband used to
surprise me he used a bunch of flowers I
was surprised by my husband with a bunch
of flowers but you can also of course
leave out by my husband and simply say I
was surprised with a bunch of flowers so
it's quite common to have a passive form
and then with afterwards to introduce
what was used by the agent 21 looks at a
very specific structure there followed
by the passive form and then another to
be here's an example there is believed
to be ancient ruins in this
area what's happened here well there is
believed to be well is believed is a
passive structure to be followed by the
past participle and what it means here
is people believe that there is so if we
say there is believed to be people
believe that there is we could change
believe for other verbs there is known
to be people know that there is 22 looks
at something called object compliments
have a look at this example the tutor
had the highest
qualifications students considered her a
genius now focus on her a
genius this doesn't happen very often
but sometimes the object then has a
complement afterwards what do we mean by
this well what we mean is the noun a
genius is actually describing the object
it's not what's affected by the object
usually when we have two objects one
thing affects the other he gave her a
car the car is affected by her actions
but not here here the second object
simply describes the first object the
students considered her a genius so how
does this affect the passive form we can
make the passive here as follows she was
considered a genius by the students so
here we have the first object goes to
the front of the
sentence then the verb was considered
and then the object complement comes
afterwards and then by the student it's
also possible to have by the students
followed by the object complement a
genius but the most common way to say
this is as follows she was considered a
genius by the students object complement
then by and the subject by is not the
only word that we use to introduce the
subject when it comes at the end of the
sentence consider some of the following
examples where by is replaced with
another preposition firstly through and
this introduces the means to achieve the
action it was organized through an
agency in other words you've got
something you want to do but you have to
go through someone else to get there I
want to achieve this activity ity it
getss to the end here but someone helps
me in the middle and that's called the
agency it goes through them it was
organized not by an agency but through
an agency by is possible but it doesn't
capture the full meaning that they are
helping something to happen rather than
doing everything another replacement for
buy is of and this goes with certain
verbs only such as scared I am scared of
snakes now in most situations when you
have a structure that follows this rule
when you make it passive you add to back
in he was made to go not he was made go
and then optionally you can add the
subject by
me but you have to know that there are
some exceptions to this and the major
exception is with the verb let I let him
go here we do not add to before the go
he was let go becomes the passive and
finally there are some verbs that are
almost always passive and these verbs
are born repute and rumor I was born in
1998 you'll very rarely see this used in
the active voice in the past it was
possible to say I bore a child it is
used a little bit now days but it's
hardly ever used it's almost always was
born is born has been born it's almost
always in the passive similarly with the
ver repute it is reputed to be the
oldest discovery of its kind repute is
to do with what people say about
something but you'll hardly ever see
this used in an active sense and also
with rumor when it's a verb form rumor
can be a noun but in the verb form it's
most always a passive structure it is
rumored people think in other words that
the king will visit next year so those
were the 25 rules for using the passive
but there's one more question we still
need to answer why do we use the passive
at all well there are some good reasons
why you should use the passive in sub
situations the first reason is the
passive is more formal when you use the
passive it sounds more professional or
academic so if you want to increase the
formality in your writing make it sound
more academic more businesslike then
consider using some sentences in the
passive another reason to use the
passive is to focus on the subject if I
have a sentence such as I saw a person
walking down the street
but I want to emphasize the person
more then I may put the person at the
front of the sentence instead I could
say the person was seen walking down the
street now the person's at the beginning
more focus is on that person it becomes
the subject of the sentence the subject
of what I'm talking about another reason
is to avoid using the subject
this is useful when someone makes a
mistake perhaps you know someone who
accidentally drove their car and hit a
wall instead of telling someone I hit
the wall you might feel embarrassed and
it might be easier to say this
instead the wall was
hit but you could leave out the subject
in the passive so you don't have to say
it was you at all it's less embarrassing
and it protects your identity that's
another reason why you could use the
passive you could also use the passive
to avoid repetition if you have a long
paragraph where you say I did this I did
that I did another thing you can change
the order to avoid it being so
repetitive and always starting with the
same subject or you could use the
passive to f focus on the process not
the person instead of saying for example
first I got the ingredients for the meal
then I put the ingredients together then
I put the ingredients in the oven then I
Then I then I instead of doing that
where we focus on the person perhaps
we're more interested in communicating
the process in this case it's better to
use the
passive ingredients were taken out of
the cupboard ingredients were mixed
together it was placed in the
oven the meal was taken out of the oven
do you see how we're now focusing on the
process not the person and if we're
interested in the process that could be
the best thing to do
so the basic rules for the first
conditional are that you use if followed
by the present simple and then a clause
with will look at the example in green
if they arrive for the lecture early
they will get a seat near the front if
with the present simple if they arrive
and then a clause with will they will
get and this suggests a present or
future consequence of a condition the
condition is that they arrive early and
the consequence or the outcome of that
is they will get a seat near the front
so they need to do one thing for another
thing to happen that's what conditionals
are all about another way of saying this
that's similar is to include then before
the will Clause the word then makes it
clearer that one thing depends on
another but now let's go into some more
advanced uses of the first condition one
Advanced use of the first conditional is
to place will in the if Clause now hold
on you may have been taught that you
never put will in the if Clause but
sometimes you do look at the example in
green if you will benefit from my
assistance I will help you with your
work and here what's happened is the
condition in the if Clause is a result
of the second Clause so if still
introduces the
condition if you will benefit from my
assistance but the condition is that
there's a result from the consequence I
will help you with your work and that
leads to benefit from my assistance and
if this is a situation where the
condition actually contains the result
too then we can place will in the if
clause in this way
another reason we'll put will in the if
Clause is for polite requests if you
will sign the register we will let you
join the
class so here normally we would say if
you sign the register but to indicate as
a polite request we can use will later
on in this lesson we'll see that you can
use would as well now so far we've only
looked at conditionals with will but we
can use other models too such as might
or could if we run as fast as possible
we might catch the train which you can
see on the screen below now why would we
use might or could well will indicates
quite a high level of certainty in the
consequence happening after the
condition but might reduces that
certainty so now it's a possible
consequence not a certain consequence if
we run as fast as possible we might
catch the train it's possible to catch
the train but of course we might miss it
as well we can also use must now here we
introduce something which is necessary
as a condition if you want to catch the
train you must arrive on time to fulfill
the condition you must do something
necessary you can also use can with can
fulfilling the condition leads to
Ability or a possibility becoming
available if we buy tickets for the
sleeper Carriage we can sleep on the
strain so here the consequence is not
certain it's just that the possibility
is now opened up it now becomes
available because we fulfilled the
condition we bought the tickets for the
sleeper Carriage now we have the ability
to do what that enabled us to do sleep
on the
train and we can use sh and this
introduces a consequence in the form of
advice if you want to get a seat on the
train you should travel at quiet time
so here the consequence is advice not a
certainty now there's something
interesting about must and should with
the first conditional because sometimes
must and should move the condition to
the second Clause this is what happened
in the example that we just looked at if
you want to get a seat on a train you
should travel at quiet times now here
the condition is travel at quiet times
the part with should the consequence
comes in the If part get a seat you
could actually have said if you travel
at quiet times you will get a seat but
in this special situation when you're
talking about your needs or wants or
wishes and you use should in the second
Clause the order actually gets reversed
so the condition comes with the should
part or the must part however in other
situations the normal first conditional
rules apply if you go to London you
should visit Big Ben here the order is
normal go to London is the condition if
that condition is met then the following
can happen you should visit Big
Ben now there are lots of other first
conditional rules too and we're going to
call them all advanced so let's look at
them one by one
firstly if with a past simple clause and
then a clause with will now again you
may say surely the past simple with if
is the second conditional not here if
using a past situation to describe a
likely future
consequence it is possible to use the
past tense in the if Clause now study
this example the examples in this part
of the video are all going to be based
on clothes or making clothes so let's
look at it if the factory didn't use
high quality materials when making your
shirt it will wear out
quickly so here didn't use refers to a
past
situation so the past situation was the
condition affecting the consequence
later it's as if we don't know what what
happened in the past here but we are
Imagining the consequences of the past
relating to the present so if this
didn't happen in the past we're not sure
about it but we're thinking maybe it
didn't so if it didn't then this present
situation will be true as a consequence
so it has the qualities of the first
conditional because this is a real
situation it's just that the condition
is something in the past
and we don't actually know whether that
condition was fulfilled or
Not Another first conditional rule is
we're using going to instead of will now
why would you use going to instead of
will well this is for a pre-planned
consequence if the materials arrive on
time I'm going to make socks tomorrow
now why going to here it's because the
plan already exists the plan exists to
make the socks but there is one
condition that needs to be fulfilled
before that plan can be confirmed so to
emphasize it's a plan and not just a
consequence of um the condition they
will use going to now you could have
used will here as well but going to is
useful to say I've already planned this
because that's why we use going to
sometimes for the
future another conditional rule is using
should followed by an imperative
Clause look at the example at the
bottom if you should find the buttons
tell me so I can repair my coat so if
you should if subject and then should
and then the imperative Clause is where
we put the verb at the beginning to give
an instruction tell me so this structure
is used looking at the words in Black
now this structure is used when
something probably won't happen but you
state the condition in case it does it's
interesting that should doesn't have
anything to do with advice here should
here
indicates the condition is unlikely but
might happen so keep watching keep
looking if you find the buttons tell me
if you should find the buttons tell me
should indicates that you are looking
out for something to happen that may not
happen in this
case variations on this structure
include using happen to which really
works in the same way if you happen to
find the buttons tell me so I can repair
my coat and also should happen to
there's no change in meaning it's just
words that some people use for the same
thing if you should happen to find the
buttons tell me so I can repair my my
coat the previous example only had
should but now we've added in the extra
part should happen to so if I should if
you should if I happen to If you happen
to if I should happen to if you should
happen to all do the same thing in
certain situations we can omit key words
from the first conditional such as if in
very informal situations where using an
if sentence to give quick instructions
we might omit if Al together which means
leave it out you want to finish early
work harder but be aware you may have
noticed that the tone perhaps wasn't the
friendliest and that's true so here's a
warning omitting if to give a quick
informal instruction can sound impatient
insistent and possibly roote so while
it's a grammatical possibility be
careful when using it and if you hear it
you've probably heard some annoyance as
well from the
speaker another way we can omit words is
by omitting the subject followed by the
verb to be this could be used when
giving very formal or official
instructions the imperative is sometimes
used in the second Clause instead of a
structure with Will as in the example
here if told to leave do do so
immediately this is short for if you are
told to leave do so immediately but to
make it more formal more official
sounding more like a command with
authority we've left out the subject and
to
be let's go on to using the word when
when is going to come up more when we
look at the zero conditional but
sometimes it can be used in place of of
if and there isn't much change in the
meaning at all and in this particular
case when we omit uh the subject and to
be that's the case so if we say when
told to leave do so immediately there's
not much difference to saying if told to
leave except that when indicates there's
a like very strong likelihood that
something will take place if is simply
saying the time that it's takes place do
this but I'm not saying that I'm certain
it will happen let's move on to the zero
conditional then first of all we're
going to look at the basic uses and now
our theme has changed we're moving from
Summer to Autumn and into winter
here so for the most basic use we have
if followed by a present simple clause
and then another present simple Clause
here not a will
Clause look at the example and then we
we'll look at the explanation so the
example in green if the weather turns
cold people don't go out in this
town in Autumn that's what happens the
weather goes
cold here if is used for things that
will possibly happen and always lead to
the same
consequence and that's the key
difference here by using the present
simple in the second Clause as well
we're indicating to our reader or
listener that the condition always leads
to the same consequence so what we mean
here is every time the weather turns
cold the consequence will be the same
also every time people don't go out it's
a natural reaction to the
situation but we could also use when as
well now why would we use when instead
of if well we use this structure for
things that will definitely happen and
will always lead to the same
consequence so when autumn arrives the
leaves on many trees turn
brown but we used when instead of if
here because Autumn always arrives it's
certain it's not just a
possibility when I said if it turns cold
I don't know if it's going to turn cold
or
not but I'm just saying that should this
be true then the next consequence
happens when is different when is
something that will definitely happen
there's no doubt about it when autumn
arrives of course it will
arrive as with the first conditional
when Clauses can be followed by a range
of models leading to different meanings
the key difference is that a when Clause
represent something that is guaranteed
to happen the models don't change that
but they still introduce a new element
of meaning let's look at a few here when
you get home you must keep quiet so in
this case we are certain that the person
is going to get home perhaps they've
just called you and they said you're two
minutes they're two minutes away from
being home they're going to walk through
the door any second so we don't need to
say if because we know it's going to
happen so we use when when you get home
but here's what the consequence should
be there something necessary as a result
you must keep quiet must showing
necessity might can be used as well when
you get home I might be
asleep so one definite thing that's
going to happen get home one possible
thing that you'll discover on arrival I
might be
asleep can again can be used used when
you get home you can eat anything you
find in the fridge so you have some
ability if this condition is met and you
should take your shoes off immediately
so there's some advice for you the
moment that this happens rule 38 doesn't
fit neatly into any of the conditionals
zero first second or third if you must
is a phrase all on its own but we can
use it as a condition and this means a
Rel and Concession to someone else's
wishes or it could mean if it is
entirely necessary as in the example in
red I don't want you to go out at night
but if you must please be careful so
here if you must indicates that there is
reluctance but an acceptance that it
might happen so if the following thing
has to happen if it's entirely necessary
then please make sure the next thing
happens if you
must now let's look at something called
the second conditional starting with the
basic uses before we go on to the
advanced and the topic here is having
enough money to buy a
car here is the main second conditional
structure if followed by a past simple
clause and then a clause with would if I
earned a lot of money I would buy a
bigger car so here we have if I earned
if with a past simple clause and then I
would buy a clause with wood and this
does the following it introduces a
condition if I earned a lot of money
leading to a present or future
consequence I would buy a bigger car but
the difference to the first conditional
is this is a situation that is imaginary
it's very unlikely to happen in real
life so the person saying this doesn't
think they're going to earn a lot of
money they're just imagining it now with
the second conditional something happens
to the verb to be that doesn't happen in
many other situations and that is we can
use were when we would normally use was
if I were rich I would choose to buy a
fast car so it is common to use were
after these subjects I or he or she or
it instead of was when we normally would
use was for the past simple of the verb
to be now let's go on to Advanced uses
now sometimes this structure doesn't get
followed by W but it could get followed
by a question and this is one reason
why look at the words in green first if
you were in my city last week why didn't
you visit
me so the structure is used here to mean
if something is true I have a related
question if you were in my city last
week the related question why didn't you
visit me now we often use this when
we're talking about something that did
happen in the
past it is often used when a person did
something but the second person doesn't
understand why this didn't lead her to a
particular consequence so the person
speaking has heard that their friend was
it or they thought it was their friend
they heard that their friend was in
their City last week perhaps someone
told them and that made them think why
didn't that lead to this consequence why
didn't that person visit me why didn't
this situation lead to another
outcome another Advanced use of the
second conditional is when we put would
into the if Clause now sometimes in
informal conversation English people use
would in the if Clause
too if you would earn a lot of money
would you buy a bigger car now
grammatically many grammar books will
tell you this is not correct I'm simply
including this in the video because it
has slipped into English usage quite a
lot so it's worth knowing that people
use it but when you're writing I suggest
you stick to the old
rules now this also happens more
commonly when we are making requests
more formal or polite sounding and
there's a use of wood to make everything
more polite and this is more valid and
more accepted by grammar books so the
example here I would prefer it if you
would drive more slowly here the if
Clause comes second and the other Clause
comes first but instead of saying if you
drive more slowly or if you drove more
slowly by saying would drive we're
making it more polite would being that
word that can make things more
polite now sometimes the Clause after if
and the past simple contains should and
this represents advice based on a
hypothetical
situation for example if you were paid
one
$10,000 to do a parachute jump you
should do it now what about you what do
you think how much would I need to pay
you to do a parachute jump but here
we're giving advice to someone they
offered you
$10,000 you should do it so should
replaces wood here
because um it requires advice instead
it's still an unlikely situation it's
still an imaginary situation but the
person is Imagining the advice they
would give if the condition was met
however unlikely now might can be used
too if I were paid $20,000 to jump out
of a plane I might do it so here we're
saying that the uh consequence is
possible not certain but it's still an
unlikely situation because I don't think
someone's going to pay me
$20,000 to do
it now before we go on let me mention
that although should and might are used
commonly in second conditional
structures are models less so so we saw
in the first conditional and the zero
conditional we used words such as must
as well less likely in the second
conditional but one other thing we can
do is use will in the second Clause
instead of would so there is this
structure here if followed by a clause
with would and then a clause with Will
and this is usually used when making a
polite request with a promise of what
happens if the request is
granted if you would let me do a
parachute jump so this is
polite then the following I will donate
to
[Music]
charity here W does not indicate
something being hypothetical this is a
real request you're actually asking
something about somewhat about a real
situation please let me do
this I will do
that and sometimes we can use were to in
the if clause and then the Clause follow
up with would in the second clause and
this introduces a future hypothetical
activity if you were to jump out of a
plane your parents would be terrified
would your parents be terrified so again
it's still hypothetical but it's it's
placing it in the future if you were to
this structure indicate something not
present but something coming up
after and there's more advanced uses of
the second conditional
still you can use would it followed by
the If
part with a past simple
Clause would it be okay
if I change my mind about the parachute
jump maybe that would happen to you if
you get into the plane some people when
they get into the plane finally decide
they don't want to do a parachute jump
at all now this is a polite way of
asking if you can or can't do a certain
activity you front it which means put
the words at the beginning with would it
and it's normally would it be something
would it be accepted ible would it be
possible would it be
okay but four is often used to introduce
the only reason why a situation did not
happen but for the storms we would have
jumped out of a plane today the storms
were the only reason why this did not
happen and if it wasn't for is similar
to but for but it's often used to roduce
something that saved a situation from a
bad consequence if it wasn't for John I
would never have fulfilled my ambitions
to jump out of a plane John obviously
persuaded me John helped me get used to
the idea John reassured me and so I did
it but John was the only reason if it
wasn't for John no I would never have
fulfilled my
ambitions so let's leave the second
conditional behind and now let's go on
to the third conditional and we're going
to use the topic of a failed exam first
of all the basic use of the third
conditional the structure in the basic
use is as follows if followed by a past
perfect Clause then in the second Clause
a clause with would have and the past
participle and this looks back at past
situations and imagines how they might
have been different if I had studied
harder I would have passed my exams have
you ever been in that situation it's not
now it's in the past the exams are in
the past you failed and you're
thinking I should have done something
else now although this structure usually
refers to a past consequence in the
second Clause it can also refer to a
present or future consequence if the
content text allows study this example
here if I had studied harder I would
have reached a higher level by
now so something happened in the past I
didn't study
hard and that past
situation meant there was actually a
present consequence I'm not at the level
I should
be now let's go on to Advanced uses now
sometimes we can use would be in the
second Clause instead of would have and
the past participle so this is an
alternative to what we just saw before
about a past situation having a present
or future consequence if I had studied
harder I would be studying at a higher
level so here it's would be studying not
would have been or would have
studied so we're still in imagining
things we're still Imagining the past
we're still
thinking I didn't study hard enough in
the
past could things have been different
well if I had studied
harder if things were different in the
past then here's the consequence but the
consequence is now A present one I would
be studying at a higher level
now sometimes we could use could have
with the past participle instead of
would have now here it introduces a
possible consequence had a certain
situation been different in the past if
I had revised every day I could have
passed my
exams now might can be used instead of
could here if I had revised every day I
could have passed by exams but again
must and should are uncommon in the
third conditional
let's go on to short forms with
if we can use this short phrase if
anything followed by a clause now if
anything is an
adverbial and this introduces a clause
meaning the following if there is any
possibility of the previous thing being
true then this should happen instead
study the example
closely it's split into two sentences
here I don't think I should invite her
to dinner
if anything she should invite me so if
anything introduces the truth of the
situation considering what was in the
sentence before well I don't think
that's true if anything well that
introduces what should happen instead if
anything she should invite
me another short form of if is if so and
this simply links a consequence back to
a condition in the previous
sentence why don't you see if you can
get some time off next
Friday if so we can accept your mother's
invitation so try to get time off next
Friday let's see if you're successful if
so means if you are successful with this
if you are successful here is the
potential consequence or result or
something that becomes possible we can
accept your mother's invit
ation if not is also used in a number of
ways and this is a consequence of a
condition in the previous sentence not
being fulfilled why don't you see if you
can get some time off next
Friday if not ask for a day or for the
weekend so if not suggests that the
condition in the sentence before is not
fulfilled and therefore you have to take
a different course of action now if not
can also be used to introduce an
intensification
like this often if not always she
invites us to her birthday party what
does that mean here well often she
invites us to her birthday party but if
I've got it wrong about being often then
actually it's more rather than less so
I'm intensifying the often when I'm
saying often I probably mean more than
often often if not always it in
intensifies the often so sometimes we
can invert structures when we're talking
about conditionals sometimes this causes
if to disappear in the first example
look at the words in green first were I
to spend time with my son I would play
games with him now this is a second
conditional structure but the word if
has gone and the subject and verb have
swapped places not if I were but just
were I and this is an alternative to if
I were for the second conditional it's
followed by either two plus a verb or an
adjective or a noun phrase but it's
still got the same hypothetical second
conditional meaning and would in the
second
Clause with the third conditional
instead of saying if I had I could say
had plus I so we have a clause starting
with had and the
subject and then in the second Clause we
still have the same would have and the
past participle had I spent more time
with my son I would have played games
with him another form of inversion
happens with the word should and this
time it represents the first conditional
should there be no school today I will
take my son to the
park so instead of using IF here we
invert the structure but should goes at
the
beginning several structures are
possible with if only firstly if only
with a past tense Clause now this
actually introduces a desire for
something to be different in the present
similar to the second conditional if
only the weather was better I'm meaning
now if we use a clause with would then
this indicates a desire for something to
be different in the future if only it
would stop raining so From This Moment
onwards I want it to stop
raining if you use a past perfect Clause
this is when you look back to the past
and wish that the outcome of something
was different to the reality if only it
had been a sunny day
yesterday there are many alternative
words that you can use in the place of
if as
well supposing is one of those this is
similar to if in the first Clause but it
often leads to to a question in the
second clause for example looking at the
food here we have this worry supposing
the delivery of the food for the lunch
is late how will we feed all of our
guests we can also use the word imagine
this can turn an if Clause into an
independent sentence imagine if everyone
had enough food all Charities would
close so we still have if here but after
the word imagine it becomes a sentence
on its own but sometimes we can use
imagine to introduce a hypothetical
situation without if as well imagine
life in an igloo what's an igloo it's
that snow house that is in a kind of a
circle that people build in cold places
where there's
snow but imagine life in an Ingo in a
snow house
it would be challenging for someone who
comes from a hot country to cook in it
so here we don't use if at all we're
just imagining a situation and then
responding to it provided that or
providing both introduce a unique
condition for the consequential clause
and it's often used as a first
conditional provided that the food has
been cooked thoroughly it will be safe
so provided that this condition needs to
be met and then the consequence will be
true and on condition that is um means
that the second Clause can only be
fulfilled after the first condition is
also fulfilled on condition that you get
qualified you can work as our
cook so here we're offering someone the
opportunity to cook our food perhaps is
an employment you can be the cook for
the restaurant but there's one condition
you must fulfill this condition get
qualified so long as is similar so long
as you get qualified you can become our
cook there's one thing you need to do
and then the next part can be
fulfilled what if introduces a on
sentence hypothetical question about a
condition what if the food doesn't
arrive what would we do
next and now for some final bits here's
some things not to forget remember that
the order of Clauses in a conditional
can usually be reversed so if you say if
you speak I will answer you could switch
it around I will answer if you speak for
the common uses of the first conditional
second conditional third conditional
zero conditional that can always happen
but there were some structures in the
which were more advanced uses where you
could not particularly if they're not
full
Clauses will would and had can be
contracted informally to apostrophe LL
or apostrophe D would and had both
contract to apostrophe D so you have to
use the rest of the context of the
sentence to know which one it is if you
speak I'll
answer and now for a few more final bits
that will uh just finish off your
knowledge of the conditionals we could
use an imperative Clause before an if or
when Clause we can do this in these ways
answer him him if he speaks remember the
imperative is an instruction where we
put the verb at the beginning before
putting anything to do with anyone else
we don't include the subject we simply
put the verb and it's an instruction
answer him if he speaks that's present
answer him uh sorry ask him if he will
come to dinner so the will indicates
future here and listen to him when he
speaks and the word when indicates
always do
this unless can introduce a conditional
meaning except if unless you listen to
the speaker you won't know the
answer let's turn that around you won't
know the
answer but there's one reason that this
would be different you listen to the
speaker so unless introduces this one
reason why that consequence would be
different even if introduces a
conditional with the sense that doing
something won't enable the condition to
be fulfilled even if you read all of the
books you won't learn what the lecturer
can tell
you so even if says you can do this you
can do this you can do this you can
do as much of this particular situation
read all the books as you
like it still won't affect the next
condition you won't learn what the
lecturer can tell
you can for extreme surprise before we
look at this in more detail let's remind
ourselves of some of the basic uses of
can we can use can for Ability
permission requests possib ability and
negative deduction with ability I can
play the guitar it's something I am able
to do with permission you can start the
exam but you can't use your phone
someone tells you if it's permitted or
not with requests can you pass me the
salt with possibility you can walk up
the hill on this path or you can go by
bike in other words it is possible to do
either one thing or the other thing with
negative deduction we are working out
that something cannot be the right
answer in the present and note this is
only used in the negative with the word
can but let's go back to can for extreme
surprise let's look at a couple of
pictures first to get a better
understanding of what we mean do you
ever remember being in an exam like this
let's say the exam started at 2:00 and
you work really hard at this exam so
hard that you don't notice that all the
time has already passed the trouble is
you haven't finished the exam and you
are so surprised that the exam has
finished already and you say this it
can't be time to finish it feels like
I've just
started so here can't does not mean that
something isn't true the situation is
true we're using can't to show our
surprise that it's true we're surprised
that it's time to
finish in another example have you ever
finished first in something if you have
you might have said this we W first
pricee can you believe it now here can
you believe it
doesn't mean that you don't believe it
or you should be able to be believe it
but what it means is it's hard to
believe the situation is true and it's
hard to believe can you believe it I'm
finding it hard so can is used for
extreme
surprise and now something to help you
with your learning learning is always
better when there is a task and
interaction so I have a task for you
which common use of modal verbs has been
missed out of this video watch carefully
type your answer in the comments and
I'll let you know if you were right now
for the modal verb could here are some
basic uses of could ability in the past
which is General polite requests past
possibility and suggested
actions with ability in the past and
example might be I could touch my toes
when I was a child it's something I
could generally do when I was a child
not at one specific moment and it's in
the past with polite requests could you
help me with my homework it's slightly
more polite than using can with
possibility we could see the beach from
our hotel room it's something that was
possible to do and again it's in the
past with suggested actions the front
door is locked you could try the back
door so could here introduces a
suggestion but there are some more
advanced uses of could for example past
permission present deduction and past
deduction with past permission they
could play in the park when they were
younger but now they are too old it's
something they were allowed to do when
they were younger with present
deduction they could be be hiding this
is what we think might be the case at
the moment but with past deduction the
parents could have called them home this
is what we think might have happened
before now but it's all to do with our
thinking based upon what we know it's
deduction but now for a more detailed
look at the most advanced uses of could
and number 29 on our list is could never
have here's someone who has a job they
think everything is going well until one
day they get fired the manager tells
them they no longer have their job and
the worker says this I could never have
imagined this happening and here could
never have means I was unable to I was
unable to see what was going to happen
number 28 is I tried how I
could let's continue our story of the
person who's lost their job a colleague
of theirs then goes to the manager and
begs the manager to give them their job
back and they tell their friend this I
tried how I could to stop him and here
this means with all my ability I tried
how I
could 27
I could not can sometimes be used for I
don't but this is particularly
oldfashioned English it's something
you're more likely to read than to
hear imagine you have someone in your
family perhaps an uncle who has gone to
prison they're being released from
prison but you're not happy about it you
say this my uncle has been released from
prison though I could not wish to see
him at present and here I could not wish
means I don't wish to but again let me
remind you this is a more old-fashioned
use of
English and 26 is unreal past
possibility has anyone given you lots of
presence that you weren't
expecting maybe you've said this before
my father gave me an amazing gift it's
more than I could have wished for and
here could have wished for means
imagining what was possible in the
past perhaps in the past I may have had
these wishes and this was more than
those wishes I had in the
past I couldn't have wished for more it
wasn't possible to wish for more and
lastly with could future
deduction here's a lady who enjoys
dancing until one day she gives
up it's sad that she stopped dance
classes she could have become a famous
dancer and here could have become means
a possible future outcome which will now
never happen so we're familiar with
could have being for the past as in past
deduction but this situation is not past
we're thinking about a possibility for
the future but it's a possibility for
the future that is not going to happen
because she's decided to stop dancing so
we are deducing we are imagining we are
speculating the possibility that could
have exist in the future this is
something that is in the future in our
minds where we're thinking about what
the future would look like when we get
there but it's not going to happen it's
an unreal future situation and we can
use could have to represent that now
let's look at the modal verb would there
are many Advanced uses of word but let's
start with the basic uses at a basic
level we can use would for the past of
will for reported speech past habits and
routines being hypothetical and polite
requests as the past of will we could
say this they said they would return
next summer so here somebody or some
people have said we will return next
summer but when it's reported to someone
else will becomes word in reported
speech they said they would return next
summer with past habits and routines the
circus would come to my town every year
when I was young so this is something
that was a routine every year it
happened regularly so we use wood for
that with being hypothetical the example
we have here if I were braver I would
work with lions in a zoo so we are
imagining a situation which is not real
and we use would but note this is a
present
situation and with polite requests would
you give up your chair for the elderly
lady would is more polite than will or
can but there are also some more
advanced uses too we can use would for
the future in the past for example the
day ended badly it would get better the
next day so word introduces the next day
but it's the next day from the time in
the story not from now it's the future
compared to a past
time with past refusal I wouldn't go to
the zoo last year because there were no
birds there so they refused and wouldn't
shows it's a past refusal with the next
example I'm not surprised you're going I
would do the same here the subject which
is I comments as if if they were doing
it I would do the same here means my
actions and your actions would be equal
there would be no difference between
them so would indicates that this is my
action if I stand in your place and it
can be the same in the past using would
have I'm not surprised you didn't go I
would have done the same but now let's
look at the most advanced uses of
w 24 is make claims Less
Direct let me walk you through an
example to show you what I mean so
imagine that you are looking at some
research and you read one paper of
research that says yes about the topic
but then you read another paper that
says no about the same
topic and you might think this
the results were different to the
previous
study this would suggest that one of the
studies made a
mistake let's focus on would suggest
here would suggest means I think this is
true but I don't want to appear
overconfident because we could have just
said this suggests that one of the
studies made a mistake we don't have to
use w
the effect of w here is simply to take
the emphasis off the
suggest it makes it appear less
confident less
assuming and we do this a lot
particularly in formal academic writing
we use would followed by an opinion
word when we are introducing conclusions
about something where we want to say
this is what I think the truth is but I
don't want you to think I'm being
arrogant or overconfident W just lessens
the impact of the word and makes it less
direct for the person reading it 23 is
stating
preferences if you've been to the United
Kingdom you'll know what the dish is on
the left this is fish and chips on the
right we have steak which one do you
prefer well the person here says this in
response to the question would you like
fish and chips they say I would rather
have a steak please so here would rather
introduces my preference we could also
say would prefer as well 22 is future
speculation would you like to go on a
holiday to this
place but do you not have enough time
you might say this it would have been
nice to go on holiday but I far too much
to do so here I'm imagining about a
holiday in the present or the
future we're not talking about the past
I would like to go on holiday in the
future but it's not possible so I am
imagining what the situation could be
like if it were true it would have been
nice 21 is as luck would have it imagine
you buy a new house you go upstairs you
look under the pillow and you find money
under the
pillow and you say this when we entered
our new home as luck would have it we
found money under the bed and here as
luck would have it means very lucky it's
an adverbial phrase that we add when we
want to say that we've been very lucky
in a particular
situation and number 20 is would you
believe
it imagine you meet the king and the
King comes over to you and shakes your
hand would you believe it the king shook
my hand in other words it's hard to
believe would you believe it I'm finding
it hard to
believe let's move on to some more modal
verbs and this time we're looking at may
and might firstly some basic uses
logical deduction for the present
logical deduction for the past
permission with May and offering good
wishes with May with logical deduction
for the present the train might be
coming I can hear it in the distance so
this is where we work something out
based on what we know now logical
deduction in the past is working
something out based on what probably
happened before the train may have left
it's not at the station so here we're
thinking about something that probably
happened in the past with permission we
only use may may I sit next to you and
if you offer good wishes this is also
may may you enjoy good health in the new
year but there are some more Advanced
uses as well and number 19 in our list
of advanced modal verbs is may as well
or might as
well let's go back to our idea of being
in an
exam let's imagine you're taking the
exam and you come across some questions
that you just don't know the answer to I
may as well give up I don't know any of
the
answers and here may as well or might as
well means I can't succeed and I think
this is what I should do so we say this
when we are in a more negative situation
we come to the end of something and we
think this is what I should do next
because I'm failing I may as well give
up now notice may as well is quite
similar to May well but but may well or
might well are
different I may well give up means it's
very possible that I will give up may as
well has a negative um indication to it
may well could be positive or negative
May well simply States a higher level of
possibility may as well has a sense of
what you should do when there is a
problem
number 18 is past
lamentation what do I mean by past
lamentation stay with me I will
explain have you ever R ridden a bike
and found it has a problem with its
brakes causing a problem such as a crash
now if someone has lent you the bike
you're probably going to be angry with
them that they gave you a bike and the
brakes didn't work on that bike you
might say this you might have told me
the brakes didn't work I could have had
a bad crash and here might have told me
you should have done this you should
have told me and I'm also feeling
annoyed about it you might have told me
the brakes didn't work you should have
done
this 17 is might meaning strength now
here strength is a noun and I've
included this because in this situation
might is not a modal verb but it may
confuse you to hear the word might being
used as a noun so it's important to know
that this can happen and here is some
context about how you might hear
it imagine your car is broken down and
you need to push it off the road
but I tried with all my might but I
could not move the car and here my might
means my strength so if you see the word
might followed by an article or an
adjective or some kind of determiner
pronoun it doesn't mean a modal verb
here it means
strength and 16 is Future
speculation you want to go to
London but unfortunately you can't I'm
sad we're not going to London next year
we may have been able to see Big Ben so
this is future speculation on a
situation which is not
possible it's similar to could have been
so we could have been able to see Big
Ben could have May have and might have
all work in the same way when it comes
to Future
speculation should is another modal verb
with Advanced uses but let's look at the
basic uses first which are advice or
suggestions obligation or the right
thing to do so with suggestions you
should stop smoking it's bad for you
with obligation children should not play
ball games on the grass here there's an
indication that someone is giving
permission or giving orders and the
right thing to do we should tell the
hotel that we broke the shower it would
be wrong to deny it so here there is no
obligation and it's not necessarily
advice we're simply exploring the right
thing to do now for some more advanced
uses we could use should when it's a
good idea for the past that didn't
happen for example I should have started
learning learning English when I was
younger I'd be fluent by now so should
have started here is something that
would have been a good idea in the past
but I didn't do it so I'm expressing the
fact that I wished this is something I
had done in the past the next example is
the opposite it happened but it wasn't a
good idea and here we use shouldn't have
I shouldn't have spent so much time
doing nothing now I'm poor and we can
also use should in conditionals to say
what is expected in the situation if
you're cold you should put a coat on
this is what I
expect but now for the most advanced
uses of should and at number 15 the
planned time of events imagine you are
thinking about a stadium and a football
match and you want to know when does the
football match start and the answer is
it should start at 300 p.m. and this is
the planned time for when it will start
referring either to the present that's
if you're expecting it to start now or
for the future if you're thinking about
later it should start at 3 p.m. meaning
later but it can also be for previously
planned time with a slight difference it
should have started at 2:00 p.m. but it
has been delayed because of the bad
traffic so there was a previous planned
time 2: p.m. and now it's not that time
anymore note that we can use should have
with this meaning in the past present or
future with the past you may not know if
it started at that time maybe in this
case you're talking to someone at
2:30 and you not you're outside the
stadium and then you notice there's not
much noise and you say to your friend
has the football match started it should
have started at 2: p.m. so here it's in
the past you're talking at 2:30 p.m. but
you're
imagining if that expected situation
happened or not in the past with the
future the planned time has changed it
should have started at 2: p.m. in the
future but has been delayed because of
the bad traffic so here perhaps you're
talking at 1: p.m. you're looking
forward in time it should have started
at 2 p.m. but there's been a change so
when your USIC should have for Planned
time in the
future then you're talking about a time
which has now
changed if you're talking about should
have for the
past you're talking about something
where you do not know if it changed or
not You're simply saying this was the ex
expectation of how it should be number
13 is ought to and ought not now in some
ways this is not an advanced feature but
it becomes Advanced when we look at the
grammatical arrangement of the
words in positive statements ought to
can replace should in formal situations
and it's important to remember that
ought to is a formal or alternative for
should it often means exactly the same
in questions use ought without to ought
you be doing that your parents told you
not
to but in negatives you use ought not to
or ought not for example we ought not do
that our parents told us not to or we
ought not to do that so the advanced
thing about ought is the different
Arrangements of language in the question
form and the negative form so it's
important to remember those and to get
those
right 12 is future
expectation are you going to a wedding
this year if you are you might say this
we're going to a wedding it should be a
wonderful
occasion this is what we expect to
happen it's simp ilar to 15 about
planned time but in this case we're
simply stating our
expectation of what the situation will
be like in the future now let's look at
the modal verb shall firstly the basic
uses and it before we begin let's look
at the point at the bottom because
that's really important shall is
generally a more formal and less used
version of will excepted some situations
but let's go through these basic uses
first sh can be used for the future as
with Will We Shall visit our aunt and
uncle tomorrow we could have said we
will visit it's used for polite offers
shall I give you some assistance and
also for indication of requirements
everyone shall leave the area
immediately it's too dangerous to stay
and this last Point leads in to the more
advanced use of shall which is added
obligation here we have someone looking
at their watch because it's about to get
dark what happens in this situation well
sometimes a parent will tell a child you
shall get back before it's dark now here
shall is a stronger instruction than
will if you say you will get back before
it's dark it just sounds like you're
predicting the future but if you say you
shall get uh back before it's dark then
you're more than predicting the future
you're indicating to them I require this
of you I'm putting added obligation on
with must there are a number of rules at
the basic level the C1 level and the C2
level let's start with the basic rules
we can use must for obligation or
prohibition
strong recommendation or certainty in
the present with obligation you must not
walk on the grass this is a rule with
strong recommendation you must go on a
river trip while you're here this
doesn't mean there's a rule but we
strongly recommend it and with they must
be on the boat trip we're indicating
that we have certainty in the present
that this is true at a slightly more
advanced level we have certainty in the
past annoyance and
determination with certainty in the past
he must have left his phone in his bag I
can hear it ringing with annoyance must
you talk so loudly and here must is
stressed and it has the effect of
showing that you're not happy with the
situation with determination I must
carry on I'm so close to the finish and
here must is almost as if you are
putting a rule on
yourself even though of course you could
break your own rule but it's to do with
determination if I say I must do
something then you're telling yourself
this is a rule for yourself make it a
rule so that you will make sure it
happens what about the most advanced
uses then well we have phrases such as
it must be and then a word in the middle
and then that
let's explore this a bit more have you
ever been late for a bus or a train or a
plane will the bus train or plane wait
for you if you're late usually
no you might see a notice like this it
must be
emphasized that the plane will leave
even if you are late and here must be
emphasized means I'm stressing the
importance and we can use this
construction must be followed by a word
followed by that to stress the
importance it must be noted it's
important to note something it must be
stated it's important to State something
so this is a really good Advanced phrase
to use if you want to stress the
importance of something number nine is
need and again this is to do with the
grammar that we use following the word
need let's introduce uh need first of
all along with have to because need to
and have to can be used instead of must
for obligation prohibition and strong
recommendation they cannot substitute
must in all
situations have to can also be used for
present certainty this has to be true
but we don't say this needs to be true
that means something completely
different
with need to we have some grammatical
complications that are similar to ought
to we add two in the positive sentences
you need to do this two is optional in
the negative
sentences you don't need to do this you
need not do this or you need to not do
this there's various options with need
and in questions two is not normally
used at all need I go yes or no but we
don't need to we don't see need I to go
just need I
go number eight is needs
must here's someone who's working all
day and look at the time there's a
little moon in the window he's also
working at night why is he working so
hard he says this I don't want to work
overtime but needs must in other words
it is necessary to meet your needs if
you say needs must it means I'm doing
something because I have to meet my
needs I have to have enough money to
live I have to have enough food I have
to do something that is absolutely
essential for my life
and when that happens you can say needs
must just simply like that notice it's
like it's in a clause all of its own
needs is like the subject and must is
like a verb needs must full stop that's
the end of the sentence it's a really
unusual structure in English but we do
use it a lot as
natives number seven is must as a noun
again it's important to recognize that
must very occasionally is not used as a
modal verb but a noun so you need to be
able to recognize it when you see it or
hear it here's an example here's a
picture of can you guess have you been
here this is the Alps range of mountains
in Europe people say it's beautiful in
the summer in fact they could say
something like this walking through the
Alps is a must it's so beautiful and
here a must is something you should do
or perhaps something you should have
we're coming towards the end of our
exploration of modal verbs but we've
missed out this major modal verb so far
will there are lots of basic uses of
will strong requests will you help me
right now this is less polite than would
future certainty it will be cold this
winter if you're certain you could use
will predictions with no physical
evidence your mother will be mad when
she sees the mess you have made this is
what you feel is going to happen but you
don't have physical evidence you haven't
seen the mother so you use will rather
than going to you use going to when you
do have physical evidence
maybe you'll say going to because you've
had a phone call with your mother and
she has made it very clear about how she
feels you've got physical evidence but
if there's no physical evidence it's
just what you think use will uh promises
use will I will pay you once I have the
money or if you make an offer don't
worry I'll help
you if you have an intention that was
unplanned or a decision that was
unplanned then you can use will here
imagine you go to court and the court
says something against you and you think
the judgment is unfair so I will appeal
against the Court's decision it's an
intention it's a response it was
unplanned but it's a
decision also as a more basic use is
future continuous she will be running in
the marathon at this time tomorrow so
we're anticipating an activity in
progress at a particular time in the
future the future perfect she will have
finished the marathon by the end of
tomorrow so this is something that will
be in the past at a particular time in
the future sometime between now and the
end of tomorrow she will have finished
the
marathon or a refusal I won't jump out
of the plane I'm far too scared so won't
here indicates a refusal in the present
but what about these more advanced you
the first one at number six is Will for
threats imagine someone is preventing
you from opening this door you get angry
with them and you say this don't get in
my way I'll call security if you do so
here will is a threat I will do this you
will be in trouble at number five we can
use the will for the present
imagine you go to a conference with lots
of
people and the speaker you notice is
wearing this pink ribbon now in the UK
and some other countries people wear a
pink ribbon for this particular reason
you will have noticed that I'm wearing a
pink ribbon this is in memory of people
who have suffered from cancer so here
will have noticed is referring to the
knowledge that people have at the time
you're anticipating that people saw this
ribbon before you
spoke so you will have noticed means in
the past before now you noticed this
this is what I expect to be true before
now and this is our shared knowledge of
now so will have noticed means I expect
or assume that you noticed it before
before now it's a kind of present
perfect but using will number four is
annoying
Behavior have you ever been in a
situation where someone is getting in
the way for example he will interfere in
our games here you're expressing your
annoyance that someone interferes a
lot he will interfere and we can use
will in this way to express a at
someone's Behavior he will always be
late she will leave the lights on and
what's important here is you put extra
stress on the word will to show that you
are using it for annoyance not for the
future and number three typical
Behavior this girl always does this
after
dinner so if someone is saying why don't
you ask this girl out after dinner you
could respond don't ask her to come out
after dinner she will always watch her
favorite program at that time here will
always watch means it's a regular
activity in the present and probably
continuing into the future it's like
saying this is our expectation similar
to when we said you will have noticed
meaning my expectation of what you
noticed in the past here without have
the this is our expectation of a regular
activity that's present but carrying on
beyond the
present and number two again addresses
the fact that will can be used as a noun
so it's important to know that so that
you don't get confused when you see it
or hear it now there are several uses of
will as a noun but desire is not often
known until you get to an advanced level
of English look at this example here's
someone who's
tired and the reason is because they
can't run anymore I just don't have the
will to finish the race and here the
will means I don't have the desire I
don't have the desire to finish the way
the race I don't have the will there are
other uses of will as a noun such as
something that says what's going to
happen to your possessions upon death
but this is a good one to know the will
means desire and that leads us to number
one and number one involves a modal verb
that is often missed out from English
language teaching that's probably
because sometimes it's a modal verb and
sometimes it's not it's the word
dare dare can be a modal verb in some
situations let's first of all look at
what it means it means to be brave
enough to do something or encourage
someone else to be brave when it's
followed by an
object so I dared to go out in the snow
this is about me being brave enough to
do
something she dared us to cross the weak
bridge this is encouraging someone else
to be brave now it doesn't look like a
modal verb in this situation but it
changes when we get into the negative or
question form
have a look at the statements now I
don't dare go out in the
snow dare you cross the weak bridge now
notice here we've left out the word to
we simply say I don't dare go out in the
snow so we have dare followed by the
infinitive without two and the same with
the question dare you cross the weak
Bridge
here we would never use two some people
might try it with the negative statement
I don't dare to go out in the snow but
in the question form we would never use
it we would always say dare without to
and notice that dare Begins the
sentence and that is something that is
reserved for auxiliary verbs and modal
verbs and for that reason we qualify
dare as a modal verb
but before we finish let me address a
controversy in English grammar is the
phrase had better a modal verb or not if
you look in this situation you may think
that it is you had better say sorry
you've really upset her so here we have
had better followed by the infinitive
without two had better means this is a
good idea in fact you should do this it
has more urgency than should it really
stresses the importance of something but
we don't really use it at the beginning
of a question but did you spot the
missing modal verb meaning in one of the
descriptions of the basic uses of modal
verbs if you think you did leave a
message in the comment and I will reply
and tell you if it is the one I was
expecting you to say and if you think
you've spotted a use of a modal verb
that I've not covered at all put that in
the comments too so we can all benefit
from your
knowledge starting with alternatives to
coordinators let's remember the basics
before looking at these Advanced
Alternatives the basics are four and nor
but or yet and so these are the seven
coordinating conjunctions and these are
used to join equal grammatical
structures such as Clauses or nouns if
you want to join Clauses then you'll
need to use these but when you're
joining nouns there are lots of
alternatives for example along with he
started work along with his colleague
along with introduces an accompanying it
so it's similar to and in its meaning he
started work and his colleague started
work he started work along with his
colleague also combined with combined
with is used for two things that act as
one they used skill combined with effort
to complete the work so there was skill
there was effort put them together and
you have the ability to complete the
work
we also could use together with together
with links two items that occur
concurrently in other words at the same
time for instance the manager called me
together with my colleague to a meeting
who was called to the meeting me and my
colleague me together with my colleague
and in addition to introduces an extra
item so it's like and but actually
something more because it's adding extra
Det detail we had new Tools in addition
to the ones we already had now we could
have said we had new tools and the ones
we already had but this tells us that
the new tools are an extra so it adds a
little bit of extra meaning here next
let's look at subordinators of time
basic subordinators of time include
before after and when and let's look at
an example of how we could use when as a
subordinator the cloud started clapping
when the music stopped now subordinators
are a little different to coordinators
with a subordinator you have two Clauses
you have a main clause and then the
subordinate clause the subordinate
clause gives extra
information which is dependent upon the
main Clause the main Clause could exist
as a sentence on its own the
subordinating clause could not so it's
different to coordinators which join two
ele elements that are equal together and
the subordinator always goes at the
beginning of the subordinating clause so
here when the music stopped when is the
subordinator and the subordinating
clause is when the music stopped now
these are fairly basic subordinators of
time more advanced subordinators of time
include just as for instance the cloud
started clapping just as the music
stopped just as introduces something at
exactly the same time as long as can
mean for a certain length of time we
promised to keep on playing as long as
the people wanted or you could say for
as long as the people
wanted as soon as is different to as
long as as soon as gives the moment when
something else can happen the band will
start playing as soon as The Pianist
arrives so when The Pianist arrives this
is the moment that the other thing can
happen that the band can start
playing the moment can mean immediately
when the music started the moment that
the lights came on exactly then so it's
linking the time to the main Clause the
music started as the main clause and the
phrase after uh the Clause after the
moment introduces the time that the main
clause
happened and at the time that well
that's similar to the moment but it's
not quite as precise here look at the
example most people were home at the
time that the band was
playing now here at the time that the
band was playing it's not necessarily
one specific moment it's a general
period of time so this focuses on the
general period of time not the specific
moment in the way that the moment
would next let's look at subordinators
of place basic ones are where wherever
or everywhere but let's make it more
advanced in the location where means the
precise place of the next clause for
instance I'll meet you in the location
where the map
indicates so similar to simply saying
where but in the location puts more
emphasis on that precise point in the
vicinity of is followed by a noun on
noun phrase and it means near this place
I expect it is in the vicinity of the
campsite at the point where is similar
to in the location but even more precise
than that at the point where the river
meets the sea there are strong currents
so not around around the place not near
the place but exactly on the place at
the point is exactly on the place and in
whichever place is a more formal
alternative for phrases or words such as
anywhere there's lots to see in
whichever place you arrive so it means
anywhere but more formal than
that uh one more subordinated of place
at wherever
means in any of places of this
type let's look at the example free feel
free to stop for arrest at wherever you
find a
bench
so there might be many benches that you
could find but at wherever means when
you find a bench then at that place do
the thing in the first the main Clause
feel free to stop for
arrest let's move on to subordinators of
Manor and subordinators of manner
include as and like but an advanced
subordinator of manner could be in the
way that and in the way that introduces
the manner of the main Clause activity
the cafe was decorated in the way that
the customers requested let's pull this
apart into two bits the cafe was
decorated that's the main Clause that
could exist on its own but we add this
subordinate clause to tell us more about
the way it happened the manner it
happened how was it decorated in this
particular way in the way that the
customers requested and often with the
subordinators of manner where you see
the word way it could be replaced with
manner it could even be replaced with
the word fashion in the way that in the
manner that in the fashion
that however is a surprising one here
because we expect this to appear with
linkers of contrast but it can actually
be used as a subordinator of manner and
here however can mean no matter which
way we tried every way and all of them
had the same result look at the example
they couldn't serve everyone on time
however hard they tried so here however
doesn't mean a contrast here however
means no matter which way they tried
this way they tried that way they tried
another way none of them worked however
hard they tried however can optionally
be followed by an adverb it could have
been however they tried but you can
often say however hard they tried
however much they tried or another
similar
adverb we could also say in whatever way
and this means it doesn't matter which
way we'll make sure everyone gets a seat
in whatever way we
can we'll do everything it doesn't
matter what we have to do we will make
this happen we'll make sure the thing in
the first lause happens and in such a
way in such a way means a particular way
to enable an action of this type so
again thinking about our coffeee shop or
our Cafe the owners might say this we've
organized the chairs in such a way that
you can sit
together so we have organized it in a
particular way in such a way which
enables the following to be
successful another type of subordinator
is a subordinator of distance we often
use as followed by an adverb and as to
uh create subordinators of distance such
as as far as but other ways of doing it
include to the point where or to the
point that now to the point where or
that introduces the
direction and the
destination she got to the point where
the children's books were
kept so what does that meme she went in
this direction and she arrived at the
destination she planned she got to the
point where we could have said she got
to the point that that and where can
often be used
interchangeably but that can also be a
subject where cannot be a
subject at the point where or at the
point that is slightly different to to
to the point to the point meant we go
somewhere and we reach a place at the
point focuses on that exact place we
stopped searching at the point where the
books
ended to the extent that it's a little
bit more abstract it gives us this idea
of distance but in a our minds in a
thinking sense it refers to distance in
an more of an abstract sense for example
we're thinking how much distance is
there um not necessarily from here to
another place but from here to another
concept or here to another
number let's go back to our books uh
theme for this subordinator the library
was successful to the extent that
satisfaction was
100% so here there was a length of
distance in terms of the satisfaction
rating from from one rating to another
and to the extent means this much this
far now let's go on to subordinators of
frequency we're probably familiar with
words such as whenever or as often but
other subordinators of frequency include
each time which introduces the
individual times something happens each
time the Ru crowed the other
chickens looked up so crowed is when the
cockr sings its song and then all the
other chickens looked at the cockro the
cockro being the male
chicken now every time is similar the
slight difference between each time and
every time is that every time focuses on
all the times something happens so the
chickens fought every time food was
thrown into their Barn in a sense the
meaning is really the same it's simply
that our attention is drawn with each to
individual occurrences uh which cover
all occurrences but every draws our
attention to just all of them without
thinking about them individually but
they tend to have a similar effect on
the listener or the
reader at any time that means all times
are possible come to my farm and see my
chickens at any time that you
want this could be shortened to Simply
any time informally come to my farm and
see my chickens anytime you want and in
the instance that in the instance that
means in one specific time but which
could recur so let's look at the example
to understand this more in the instance
that a chicken sits on her eggs do not
disturb
her so if you see this once if you see a
chicken sitting on her eggs once do not
disturb her
but the next time and the next time and
the next time also do not disturb her
it's something we expect to be
repeated and in the instance that
focuses on each of these individual
occurrences if you see this do this and
the same again anytime you see
this now for subordinators of Reason
words such as as and because and since
are good for introducing reasons in a
subordinating clause but maybe you want
more than just that well perhaps try
some of these
Alternatives in that in that introduces
the reason for a
suggestion it was an excellent
sofa in that it was good for relaxing
on so in that here kind of justifies the
point that we made in the main clause it
was an excellent sofa and now I'm going
to give an example or explain the reason
why I think that it was an excellent
sofa in that it was good for relaxing on
seeing that seeing that shows that an
action has been influenced by another
seeing that no one was sitting on the
sofa I decided to sit there
myself on account of is followed by a
noun and it's got a similar meaning to
because of but when you use on account
of there's some extra consideration that
you've put into it don't get up on
account of my
needs so don't think about what I need
too much don't get up just because
you're thinking about what I need don't
consider it in that way often on account
of is used in a more formal sense
perhaps when presenting evidence or
writing a report so it's not
particularly informal but it can be used
in any sense if it's the right thing to
use and in the light of similar to on
account of it's a bit more formal used
in report writing used perhaps when
presenting evidence in a a court
situation in the light of represents a
decision based upon something
recent I need to sit down down in the
light of the bad news I've just
heard so bad news has come to me
recently so in the light of
that um I do something else I need to
sit down in the light of introduces the
reason for sitting down
here subordinators of purpose include so
that or in order that to be more
advanced you could say for the purpose
of which introduces why something is
done I'm wearing this suit for the
purpose of looking smart that's why I
did it in the Hope means something is
done intending this
outcome I looked at older clothes in the
hope of finding a bargain so here I have
some sort of desire for the future some
sort of
prediction the main Clause is I looked
at the older clothes and I give my
purpose for that well it's because I
have this intention this desire this
hope this foresight perhaps in the Hope
in the hope of goes with a noun you
could say in the hope that to go with a
clause
afterwards with the intention of
introduces the planned effect of an
action they entered the shop with the
intention of buying a new outfit and
with a view to introduces a future plan
based on the main Clause she bought a
dress with a view to wearing it at the
wedding so she did this on one day and
the purpose was for another day in the
future next subordinators of result
which can include phrases with so and
such it was such a great day that
everyone stayed to the end so such a
followed by a noun and that can
introduce a result so with an adjective
and that can also introduce a clause
which is a subordinated clause but there
are other ways too for example with the
consequence that which presents the
direct result of a
situation now we got some snow symbols
on the screen so we're going to focus on
being cold and snowy the wind changed
Direction with the consequence that it
got cold so that's the direct result of
the wind changing
direction resulting in followed by a
noun indicates the final outcome the
snow fell at night resulting in all of
the roads being
blocked and leading to with a noun
introduces the effect of the main Clause
so demand for energy was high leading to
power
shortages similar to resulting in but
leading to has more of a cause effect
relationship one thing happens this
causes the next leading to the next and
which in turn introduces a result coming
as a natural sequence many people bought
new codes which in turn boosted the
economy there's that sense of sequence
first of all people bought things next
the economy
improved subordinator can come with
adjective Clauses often called relative
clauses now we're used to words such as
which who whom any relative pronoun when
where and so on but we can do something
else with some of these relative
pronouns as
follows in which or in who so we use a
preposition before the word which when
it's a thing or an item or whom when
it's just talking about a person in the
main Clause look at the example for in
which London is a
city in which you can easily get lost so
this introduces the location or
situation of
something um where can you easily get
lost in London so in which creates the
um the subord coordinator that links the
information to what came before
similarly at which at which goes with
the place where something occurs meet me
in the nearest place at which the bus
stops so and is more specific it's
pointing at a place in looks at a place
more generally at looks at a specific
location for which is an alternative to
the structure which followed by the
Clause followed by four four being a
reason word so for which is like the
reason which London buses are a form of
Transport for which we are grateful we
could have said which we are grateful
for but no matter which way you you say
it for which means the reason which
London buses are a form of
Transport um we are grateful for this
reason
and of which or of whom and these link
the main noun to the information after
the royal family of which many people
travel to
seea live here now because it's a family
we could also have said of whom because
we're talking about people now we're
going to move on to conjunctive adverbs
these are a little bit different to
subordinators subordinators and
coordinators join two Clauses together
but conjunctive adverbs they don't join
the sentences together they keep
sentences separate but create a
connection from one sentence to another
usually the sentence
before now when we're talking about
conjunctive adverbs for similarity you
may have used also or further more but
we can also use in a similar Manner and
this indic Ates similarity to the
previous idea the beach is full in July
sentence one in a similar manner so is
the next Beach so here in a similar
manner doesn't join the first sentence
to the second sentence but what it does
is it creates a connection between the
two the second sentence is linked to the
first sentence in the way described by
the conjunctive adverb phrase here in a
similar manner also in the same vein
which Meads a similar style or manner to
the previous the sunbeds are red in the
same vein the cafes are painted red too
so there's some Connection in terms of
style here here the theme is red being
the similarity between both
parts equally is also used as a
conjunctive adverb of a similarity it
introduces a point of the same value as
the previous
people from Germany come here full stop
equally comma the Spanish travel here uh
so there's a similarity between what the
Germans and the Spanish
do and by the same token this means the
same way or
Reason look at the ho the example here
related to holidays again the hotels are
full by the same token the restaurants
are all booked
uh now conjunctive adverbs of
contrast however is perhaps the most
used conjunctive adverb of contrast if
you want to show that uh one sentence is
going in a different direction to the
sentence before however is commonly
commonly used and it's okay to use it a
lot but you might want some alternative
sometimes similarly although is used a
lot but there are other ways that we can
express the same thing in different
words for instance by
contrast by contrast introduces an idea
taking a different
direction the uncle's family is Rich by
contrast their aunt's family is poor so
the second idea is in a different
direction to the first the first one
rich the second
poor conversely introduces something
opposite we always eat together
conversely the neighbors eat separately
two opposite things and on the flip side
is a really useful phrase to learn INF
fluent speech it does tend to be quite
informal so that you know not to use it
formally and this means an alternative
idea or point of view I enjoy seeing my
family on the flip side I like sometime
on my own so if you're discussing
something weighing up two ideas on the
flip side can move from one set of ideas
to the other side of
ideas okay conjunctive adverbs of result
therefore and as a result are the more
basic ones but we can also use hence
which is a more formal version of
therefore too many cars are on the road
hence travel times have
increased or accordingly which
introduces a natural or obvious
consequence of something taxis are very
cheap in this city accordingly many
people use them so it's a natural
consequence of the taxis being cheap
it's saying a little bit more than just
the result it's saying this that this is
obviously going to be the result
accordingly correspondingly introduces a
related result Road improvements were
made
correspondingly traffic improved there
was a relationship between the two parts
with leading to that particular result
and on that account means An Occurrence
for the reason
mentioned buses were on strike on that
account many people walked to
work so on that account here introduces
a separate sentence with a connection to
the first sentence so the first sentence
was the reason why the second bit
happened and now for conjunctive adverbs
of
restating we often use words such as in
other words meaning I'm going to explain
the same thing as before often to make
it simpler perhaps someone didn't
understand the first time you notice
that so you say in other words we'll do
this Advanced ways of restating includes
to put it another way to put it another
way is similar to in other words but
less formal I spent too much money
shopping to put it another way I'm
broke in essence restates the key issue
behind an idea I bought fruit and
vegetables in essence I only bought
healthy food so the main idea was I
bought healthy food I'm kind of
summarizing the details here and in
simpler terms mean means to restate
something more simply the supermarket is
full of produce sources from sustainable
and ethical
environments in simpler terms it neither
exploits Farmers nor the environment I'm
trying to make it more simple for my
listener do you know how to turn a
simple sentence like this into a
sentence with Advanced English grammar
like this it's all to do with adding
Advanced Clauses and in this video I'm
going to show you how to write an
advanced English sentence by using all
of the main Clauses and phrases that we
use let's start with the basics and then
make it harder later let's start with
the simplest sentence she W this has a
subject and a verb some verbs don't have
anything after them and this is all we
have subject and verb but most verbs
require something to follow them for
example she won a medal subject verb
object here the subject does an activity
the activity is one and then the
activity affects the object what did she
win she won a medal we can also have
subject verb and adverbial here the
adverbial gives extra information either
about the verb or the whole sentence
before so she won how did she win well
she won in a record time so in a record
time describes the whole of the rest of
the sentence or we can have subject verb
complement she is the champion here the
champion describes the subject so she is
the champion subject verb um compliment
the compliment tells us more about the
subject let's make our sentence longer
though so our original sentence was she
won a medal now let's turn it into a
compound sentence in a compound sentence
we have two parts two different Clauses
she won a medal and her partner won a
trophy so we have the Clause she won a
medal now a clause is any combination
that has a subject and a verb with tense
in it so she won a medal is a clause her
partner want a trophy is a clause and we
join them together with and we can make
these types of sentences with two
Clauses or more which are called
compound sentences using some of the
words below for and nor but or yet or
so but we can also make what's called a
complex sentence in a complex sentence
things are slightly different this is
the sentence we had before where we have
two Clauses but we could call these both
independent clauses they could be
sentences on their own they don't have
to be connected to each
other however in a comp a complex
sentence we have one clause which could
be on its own but another Clause that
doesn't make any sense unless it's
attached to the independent clause she
won a medal although there were many
opponents if we write although there
were many opponents on its own this
doesn't make any sense it depends on the
independent clause to make sense so we
call it a dependent
clause so two types of sentences
compound and
complex let's add even more to our
sentence now she won a medal although
there were many opponents but we could
also say more in this way she won a
medal although there were many opponents
who nearly beat her notice we've added
information after the opponents here and
this is called a relative Clause let's
explain more about how relative clauses
make our sentences more
complex so we have two types of relative
Clause we have what's called a
restrictive Clause uh look at the
example there were many opponents who
nearly beat
her which opponents do we mean not all
of them only those who nearly beat her
so in this case we are not talking about
all opponents we're talking about some
of the opponents and we need the extra
information who nearly beat her to
understand what we mean by
opponents there were many
opponents some of them nearly beat her
and some of them didn't in this sentence
we're only focused on the ones who
nearly beat her so this is
restrictive it restricts the meaning of
opponents to only a smaller number of
the total opponents compare this with a
nonrestrictive
clause there were many opponents who all
congratulated her who congratulated her
all of them so here we're not restrict
ing the amount of opponents here
opponents does mean all of them we're
simply giving extra information about
all of these
opponents how do we tell them apart when
we're reading well a nonrestrictive
clause will have a comma before the
start of the relative clause and also at
the end if it's not the end of the
sentence also we do not use that with
non-restrictive uh relative clauses
relative clauses can use relative
pronouns to introduce them who what
which where
when that could replace who or which in
a restrictive Clause so I could have
said there were many opponents that
nearly beat her but it cannot replace
the relative pronoun in the
nonrestrictive Clause I could not say
there were many opponents that all
congratulated her that would be a
mistake
and by the way if you're wondering
whether this is an adjective clause or
not some people teach relative clauses
as an adjective Clause they are two
names for the same thing there's no
difference between a relative clause and
an adjective
Clause one thing you can do with
relative clauses is you can sometimes
leave the relative pronoun out and there
are some specific rules on how to do
this here are a list of instances where
you can leave the relative Clause out
when you have the object then the
subject and then the verb what do I mean
by this well here the relative pronoun
is the object who then we have a new
subject for the relative Clause she and
then the verb
managed what does who mean here who
really means the opponent it's the
object of the main clause
before in this case we can leave who out
we could say there were many opponents
who she managed to beat but we could
also say there were many opponents she
managed to beat without
who in the next example we can also
leave out some of the words when we have
the verb to be in the relative Clause
with a prepositional phrase look at the
example there were many opponents who
were running behind her
now behind is a preposition introducing
her a prepositional
phrase we have the verb to be after the
relative pronoun who were were is the
past of to be in this instance we can
leave who were out we could say there
were many opponents who were running
behind her or we could also say there
were many opponents running behind her
without who were
one more type of clause where we can do
that is when you have the subject
followed by a passive form in the
example at the bottom of the page here
we have a passive in the relative Clause
there were many opponents who were
beaten by
me so here who is the subject of the
relative Clause because it comes
immediately before the verb phrase so it
must be grammatically the subject were
beaten is a passive form we have the
verb to be followed by the past
participle here we could use the full
form there were many opponents who were
beaten by me but we could also leave out
who were and simply say there were many
opponents beaten by
me now there are some instances where
you cannot leave out the relative
pronoun if you have the relative pronoun
as the subject followed by to be
followed by an adjective you have to say
everything there were many opponents who
were tired we can't say there were many
opponents tired also if it's the subject
and the verb there were many opponents
who sprinted to the
line so here who is the subject sprinted
is the verb it's not to be we have to
say them all we cannot leave it
out with non-restrictive Clauses we
normally cannot shorten these we
normally have to say them in fall for
example there were many opponents who
all congratulated her we cannot leave
out the word who here but there is one
case where you can leave out words with
a non-restrictive clause and again
that's when you use the passive there
were many opponents who were all beaten
by
her were and beaten is our passive
phrase we put all in the middle to add
extra meaning to beaten but it's still a
passive because we have to be followed
by the past
participle here we can leave out who
were and we could say there were many
opponents all beaten by
her now we're going to add another
Clause let's leave behind relative
clauses we're going to keep the relative
clause in this sentence and we're going
to build it a little bit more this time
we're going to add an adverb clause look
at the beginning of the sentence because
she ran so fast she won a medal although
there were many opponents who nearly
beat her look at how long our sentence
is getting already but we've got a long
way to go yet so the adverb clause here
is because she ran so fast adverb
Clauses tell us how why where when to
what degree or under which conditions
about the rest of the sentence or the
main
verb they can go before or after a
clause in our first example be because
she ran so fast comes before the main
Clause Shiana medal and don't forget
Shiana medal is still our main Clause
everything else has just been added on
however it it could also go after a
clause uh in the example below we have a
uh an adverb clause which tells us where
she won a medal where the track ended
this is an adverb clause because it
describes the whole sentence it doesn't
just describe a medal here it doesn't
tell us more about the medal so it's not
a relative Clause it's telling us about
the whole activity of the sentence and
it comes after the main Clause here she
won a
medal where did it happen where the
track
ended now sentence can get longer still
get
longer here's another extension here's
the sentence so far we're using because
as our adverb clause and here's another
addition a reporting Clause because she
ran so fast she won a medal although
there were many opponents who nearly
beat her the newspapers wrote what's
happened here well we have added a
clause which reports information or it's
taking a step back and saying how
someone else reports it this is a clause
that has full tense in it the verb
wrote is a past simple verb if it was
happening now we would say the
newspapers are writing so it does take
tense and therefore it is a
clause uh again it could go at the end
or the start of the sentence if we put
it at the start we could say this the
newspapers wrote that because she ran so
fast she won a medal although there were
many opponents who nearly beat her here
we use that to join the reporting Clause
to the rest of the sentence we've
developed and we'll come back to that
Clauses at the end of the video so wait
for
that now we're going to add a phrase
what's the difference between a phrase
and a clause we'll come to that in a
moment so far our sentence looks like
this this let's add another uh
combination of words to it this time
it's a phrase a participle phrase at the
beginning of the sentence impressed by
her performance the newspapers wrote
that because she run so fast she won a
medal although there were many opponents
who nearly beat her impressed by her
performance is a participle phrase It's
a phrase and not a clause because the
verb does not not take tense here
impressed is always impressed it doesn't
matter if it's past present or future
perfect or simple or continuous it's a
participle form there are two choices
for the participle either the past
participle impressed or you could in
some circumstances use the present
participle which is the ing form but it
doesn't work here for reasons I'll
explain now
so what does a past participle phrase do
it can be an adverbial for the whole
sentence it can be a reduced passive and
that's what we have here impressed by
her performance really means they were
impressed by her performance it could be
a shortened if condition and it could be
something that happened before the main
Clause but in all of these cases the
participle phrase introduces something
that affects what comes afterwards so
they were impressed by her performance
so what did they do as a result uh the
newspapers wrote about it so who do we
mean who was impressed by the her
performance well it's referring to the
subject of the next Clause the
newspapers so literally what we mean is
the newspapers were
impressed therefore the newspapers wrote
about it but we can reduce the passive
here to make it a participle
phrase we can also have present
participle
phrases again these are adverbial in
nature because they uh say something
about the rest of the sentence or they
have a special relationship with the
rest of the
sentence um the different possibilities
are here it could be that we're
introducing the result of an action or
the reasons for an action and here this
is in our example here we are
introducing the reasons for an action
knowing it was an interesting story that
gives the reason why they wrote about
the
story it can also describe an activity
at the same time as the main clause or
give more information on the subject of
the main Clause by the way I should
point out here that the
newspapers refers to the people who
write the newspapers we're not talking
about a piece of paper writing something
the newspapers is the company of people
who write newspapers sometimes we talk
about them like that sometimes we also
say journalists but another way of
saying journalist is to call them just
simply the
newspapers as if that's their job there
are also other participle phrases for
example having followed by a past
participle and these introduce a clause
with a past or perfect effect so look at
the example here having discovered the
story the newspapers wrote about it so
the newspapers wrote about
it this was caused by having discovered
the story having discovered the story
came first and that led to an effect and
the effect here was the newspapers wrote
about it uh normally the subject in a
participle phrase is the same as the
main Clause but it can have its own
subject in certain conditions such as
with sense verbs for example she saw her
opponent running behind her here running
is a present
participle and it has its own subject
her
opponents so it can be a bit confusing
here you would expect after a noun if
you have a verb that that verb would
take tense but here it doesn't it's a
present participle how do we know
because she saw saw is a sense verb and
afterwards we can have a phrase that has
its own subject followed by the
participle
we can add defining information too here
is our sentence so far now let's add
some extra definitions to some of the
words here we're going to add some words
in the middle so impressed by her
performance the newspapers wrote that
because she ran so fast she won a medal
the prize for victory although there
were many opponents who nearly beat
her the prize for victory
this describes what it describes the
word medal this is called an oppositive
phrase this is where you have a noun
phrase that gives extra information
about the noun before it it's a little
bit like a non-restrictive clause but
it's just a noun phrase she won a medal
the prize for
victory when do we use this a positive
phrase We normally use it when the word
we use perhaps isn't obvious to the
reader or listener in this case we
probably didn't need it because most
people know what a medal is but I'm
giving you an example of what it would
look like if you were not sure if the
reader or listener understood the medal
or if you wanted to emphasize a feature
of the medal that you think is
important then you can add this a
positive phrase a little noun phrase sep
separated by separated from the rest of
the sentence by commas coming
immediately after the noun you want to
describe it is possible to use a present
participle in this oppositive phrase for
example the medal now hanging from her
neck was golden it has the same effect
it tells us more about the medal here it
tells us where it
is here's another way of adding details
to
words here's our sentence so far now
we're going to add more information
after the words her performance
impressed by her performance in the
Olympics what's happened here well we're
giving more information about the word
performance how do we do this by adding
a noun phrase or should I say turning
her performance into a longer noun
phrase noun phrases take a main noun
and then add information to them to say
more about
them in front of the main noun you could
add an article whether you say a
performance or the performance makes a
big difference to what you mean by the
word performance a determiner or an
adjective all of those things tell us
more about the noun but they come before
but we could also add words after the
noun in a noun phrase we can add a
preposition phrase which is what we have
here in the
Olympics where was the performance in
the Olympics so the preposition phrase
here tells us more about the noun
performance we can also add a relative
clause which we've seen before or a two
plus infinitive Clause all of these will
lead to a longer noun phrase and we can
also combine more than one of these we
can have all of them together in the
same noun phrase and some parts we can
even repeat you can have as many
preposition phrases added onto each
other as you want but don't add too many
because it will make the sentence
confusing the complexity is going to
increase even
more here's our sentence so far let's
add something to the end impressed by
her performance in the Olympics the new
newspapers wrote that because she ran so
fast she won a medal the prize for
victory although the were many opponents
who nearly beat her how she runs so fast
is a mystery and the words in red are
what we call a noun clause look at the
extra words in red at the bottom again
how she run so fast is a mystery now
what's the grammatical construction of
the sentence is is the main verb here a
mystery is the object so what is the
subject well here it's actually all of
the underlined words how she runs so
fast it's a noun clause because it has a
clause for the purpose of the noun it
has a subject in the form of a
clause so why would we do this well it
emphasizes the meaning of the question
word how she run so
fast in what way does she run
so fast we could have simplified this by
simply
saying her fast running her speed but we
want to emphasize that we there is a
mystery involved the mystery is well how
how does she do this how does she run so
fast how she run so fast well that is a
mystery so we have a clause here for the
subject we can make noun Clauses with
any question word wh words followed by a
clause or how followed by a clause look
here we have how then a clause she runs
so fast she is the subject of the noun
clause and runs is the verb of the noun
clause put it all together and you have
one noun clause acting as a subject for
a longer Clause is a
mystery and the noun clause reflects an
emphasis on the meaning of the question
word so if we said when we'd be focusing
on the time if we said where we' be
focusing on the
place let's add one last Clause before
we
finish here's our sentence so far it's
one sentence although it's so along with
so many different Clauses and
phrases and now let's add add that
Clause to the end impressed by her
performance in the Olympics the
newspapers wrote that because she ran so
fast she won a medal the prize for
victory although there were many
opponents who nearly beat her how she
run so fast is a mystery that I cannot
explain so we have a clause at the end
the Clause here describes mystery
beginning with that and you can see it's
a full Clause afterwards I cannot
explain subject verb a that Clause there
are many ways in which we can make a
that clause in English let's go through
the most significant ones now you can
use a that Clause as a direct object in
a sentence she knew that I could not
explain it she is the subject knew is
the verb that I could not explain it is
the object let's think of some
Alternatives here she knew
away she knew an idea away an idea take
the
object here we've replaced it with a
longer phrase that has the same idea as
the as an object of the sentence she
knew that I could not explain
it we can also have it as a subject
compliment the fact is that I could not
explain it so here that I could not
explain it
tells me more about the subject which
was the fact which fact oh the fact that
I could not explain so here the that
Clause is a complement for the the
subject which is the
fact it could also be an adjective
complement I am pleased that you won so
I is the subject am is the verb pleased
that's the uh
adjective that describes I it's the
complement of I and then that U1 tells
us more about why you are pleased so
that you one is added onto the
adjective and you can also have a noun
complement which is a relative clause
which we looked at earlier and that's
the example we have here in this um long
sentence above a mystery that I cannot
explain so here that I cannot explain
dis describes the word
mystery and finally this is not used
very often but you can do this
grammatically and still be correct you
can use a that Clause as a subject that
I cannot explain is surprising you won't
hear this very often it's not used much
but if you read a lot of English
literature you will see people use that
Clause as the subject
of the whole
sentence basically it means this topic
this idea this
subject what's the topic or the subject
well it's I cannot explain and it's
surprising